abdicate to give up, often in a formal manner 
King Edward VIII abdicated the throne in order to marry Mrs. Wallis Simpson, a divorced American.
abdicable, abdicative, abdicator, abdication unabdicative 
aberrant unusual 
My dog displayed aberrant behavior when he refused to greet me at the door or eat any of the treats I offered. 
aberrance, aberrancy, aberrantly, aberrate, aberrational 
abeyance temporary suspension 
The council voted to place the decision in abeyance for a month while more research was conducted.   abeyant, abeyancy 
abjure to give up, often in a formal manner 
King Edward VIII abjured the throne in order to marry Mrs. Wallis Simpson, a divorced American.
abjuratory, abjurer, abjuration unabjuratory, unabjured, nonabjuratory
abstemious sparing in consumption, especially of food and drink 
Abby’s emaciated figure was the result of her abstemious lifestyle; she never ate breakfast or lunch, and rarely ate dinner.
abstemiously, abstemiousness
abstruse hard to understand 
Mr. Abbot tried to teach us how to solve an abstruse math problem, but it was too complicated for us to understand.   abstrusely, abstruseness, abstrusity
accretion an increase 
Akeem's gradual accretion of duties at work did not go unnoticed; he was given a raise for taking on the extra work.   accrete, accretive, accretionary nonaccretion, nonaccretive 
acerbic sour; harsh 
Sour Patch Kids candy tastes like acerbic gummy bears. 
acerbically, acerbate, acerbity unacerbic, unacerbically
acidulous sour; sharp 
Her acidulous criticism of my paper on Shakespeare was disappointing since I had invested many hours in research.   acidulent, acidulation subacidulous, acid
acme the highest point 
The Roman Empire reached its acme of power around 11 AD, but a slow decline occurred over the next four centuries. 
acmic, acmatic, 
acumen good judgment 
The judge was respected for his acumen when sentencing convicted defendants. 
acuminous, acuminate, acumination unacuminous
adroit highly skilled, especially with one’s hands 
The adroit mechanic was able to fix Addy’s old car, even though six other mechanics said it couldn’t be repaired.
adroitly, adroitness
aerie a nest; a home high on a mountain 
Our aerie atop Roan Mountain was a cozy escape from the hustle and bustle of city life.   aerial
aesthetic relating to beauty 
Alaina chose this church because of its aesthetic qualities; it was the most beautiful wedding chapel she had ever seen.
aesthetically, aesthetics (n.), aestheticize, aesthete, aesthetician unaesthetic
 
affable friendly 
In the fable, the affable princess was adored by all except for her three stepsisters who were angered by her friendliness.
affably, affability, affableness inaffable, inaffibility
affected fake; phony 
Afton had never traveled outside of the United States, but he used an affected French accent to attract attention.   affectedly, affectedness
aggrandize increase in size 
Agatha, an avid baseball enthusiast, used her inheritance to aggrandize her collection of baseball cards.
aggrandizement, aggrandizer, aggrandizable aggrade, grand
alacrity liveliness and eagerness 
Alaina impressed her new boss by accepting the task with alacrity; she was both eager and excited to get started.
alacritous
alchemy magical power; process of turning base metals into gold 
Al uses alchemy in the kitchen, turning simple ingredients into delicious culinary works of art. 
alchemic, alchemical, alchemistic, alchemistical, alchemically, alchemist, alchemistry Related: 
chemistry
amalgamation a combination 
Amy’s new dance routine is an amalgamation of styles, including ballet and jazz.   amalgam, amalgamate, amalgamable, amalgamative, amalgamator 
ameliorate to make better 
Amelia was an outstanding caregiver; she could ameliorate a patient’s discomfort just by smiling kindly.   ameliorable, ameliorableness, ameliorant, ameliorative, amelioratory, ameliorator
amenable agreeable 
Amy was amenable to changing my schedule at work so that I could attend my son's baseball games.
amenability, amenableness, amenably nonamenable, nonamenability, nonamenableness
amiable friendly 
The amiable celebrity was known for his willingness to sign autographs and visit with his fans.
amiably, amiability, amiableness unamiable amicable
amortize to eliminate debt by making payments 
For most borrowers, it takes thirty years to amortize their mortgage.
amortized, amortizable, amortizement, amortization unamortized
amulet magical charm to ward off evil 
Amos placed a small amulet in his pocket, a charm that he believed helped him advance to the state tennis finals.
amuletic 
anachronistic out of chronological order 
Today’s announcement about the impending demolition of the baseball stadium is anachronistic; the stadium was razed early last week.
anachronistically, anachrony, anachronic, anachronism, anachronous, anachronously
chronological, chronology
analgesic capable of relieving pain 
Although Andy was in the most painful stages of the disease, his daughter’s visit was analgesic; he was so happy to see her that his pain was significantly reduced.
analgesic (n.), analgetic analgesia
anodyne something that relieves pain 
The comedy club was an anodyne to Annika's grief; while she was there, she could forget her pain and sadness.
anodynic 
anthropocentrism theory that regards humans as the central element of the universe 
People who support the theory of anthropocentrism have a difficult time believing in intelligent life on other planets.   anthropocentric, anthropocentrically, anthropocentricity anthropology
antipathy strong dislike 
Antonio's antipathy for reporters stemmed from his childhood, when journalists hassled him about his father's trial.
antipathist, antipathize, antipathic sympathy, empathy, apathy
apathy an absence of emotion or enthusiasm 
The teacher was disappointed in the students’ apathy toward the field trip; she had mistakenly believed that this trip would finally excite them about learning.
apathetic, apathetical, apathetically, apathist sympathy, empathy, antipathy
apocryphal fake; untrue 
April told an apocryphal tale about my mother; I wanted so much to believe it even though I knew it wasn't true.
apocryphally, apocryphalness, apocryphalist 
apostate person who abandons their religion or cause 
I had been an apostate from my religion for years, but recently had started thinking about rejoining the church.   apostatic, apostatical, apostatically, apostasy, apostatize
approbation approval 
Apollo's proposal for new lighting on campus was met with approbation, as the board agreed there was a safety issue.
approbate, approbative, approbator, approbatory preapprobation, subapprobation
archaic so extremely old as seeming to belong to an earlier period 
The college cannot have sorority or fraternity houses because of an archaic town law that does not allow unmarried people to live together.
archaically, archaism, archaistic, archaist archaeology
ardor intense passion 
Mrs. Armstrong, my English teacher, is known for her ardor for the literature of William Faulkner; last summer she even visited his hometown in Mississippi in order to better visualize the settings of his books.
arrogate to claim without rights 
The government arrogated Arianna's land, so she hired a lawyer to prove it did not have any rights to her property.   arrogatingly, arrogation, arrogator, arrogative unarrogated, unarrogating
ascertain to make certain 
The detective was able to ascertain the suspect’s whereabouts on the night of the burglary through surveillance video.
ascertainable, ascertainableness, ascertainably, ascertainment, ascertainer 
ascetic a person who practices self-denial as a spiritual discipline 
To prove his devotion to the religion, the ascetic did not own anything that might provide comfort or pleasure, such as a mattress or television set.
ascetic (adj.), ascetical, ascetically, asceticism
assail to attack 
Asa was determined to master the GRE Verbal Reasoning section, so she assailed vocabulary words with determination. 
assailable, assailableness, assailer, assailment, assailant unassailed
assiduous constant and attentive 
Ashley is an assiduous researcher; she was able to find articles on the poet that even the librarian could not locate.   assiduously, assiduousness, assiduity
assuage to relieve or ease 
The shoplifter assuaged his guilt by confessing to the crime.
assuagement, assuager unassuaged, unassuaging
attenuate to weaken 
Atticus' muscles slowly attenuated when he quit working out at the gym.
attenuation, attenuator, attenuatedly unattenuated, unattenuatedly
overattenuate, subattenuate, tenuous 
audacious ) bold and fearless  
Audrey asked audacious questions that most people would be scared to ask.
audaciously, audaciousness, audacity unaudacious, unaudaciously, unaudaciousness
augment to enlarge or increase 
In an effort to augment her paper on William Faulkner, Aubrey added three pages about the author’s childhood.   augmentation, augmentable, augmentative, augmentatively, augmenter
augury divine prediction 
Augustus believed the groundhog's shadow was an augury of a delayed springtime.
augural, augurate, auguration, augur 
august noble and dignified 
The august king was admired for his good work.   augustly, augustness 
auspicious favorable; fortunate 
Austin waited for an auspicious time to ask his father to borrow the car; he finally had his chance on the day that his dad received a sizable raise at work.
auspiciously, auspiciousness
austere 1. strict; disciplined; serious 2. simple; undecorated 
Mr. Aston is the most austere teacher at school; he does not tolerate any talking nor does he accept late assignments.   austerely, austereness, austerity
autonomy independence 
The Confederate states fought to gain autonomy from the Union during the Civil War.
autonomous, autonomously, autonomist
avarice extreme greed for material wealth 
Avery amassed million-dollar homes, luxury cars, and exquisite jewelry to satisfy her avarice, but still wanted more.   avaricious, avariciously, avariciousness
avuncular resembling an uncle in kindness or indulgence 
Mr. Avery developed an avuncular affection for his neighbor’s children after having spent so many years next door.   avuncularly, avuncularity uncle
axiom principle or rule 
The golden rule is a good axiom to live by.
axiomatic, axiomatical, axiomatization nonaxiomatic, nonaxiomatical, unaxiomatic
banal repeated too often; overfamiliar through overuse 
The plot of the movie is banal; everything that takes place in this film has happened in a dozen other movies.   banally, banalize, banality
belfry a bell tower 
No one volunteered to clean out the belfry because of all the bats that live in it.
benevolent charitable; kind 
The benevolent nun spent her entire life working with the poor.
benevolently, benevolentness, benevolence benefactor, benefit
bevy a large group 
The picnic lunch on the beach attracted a bevy of birds. 
bifurcate to divide into two branches 
Biff's family tree bifurcated in 1946 when his grandmother remarried, thus creating a second branch of relatives.   bifurcately, bifurcation, bifurcous fork
bilk to cheat or swindle 
Bill was bilked out of $10,000 when he invested in the phony scheme.
bilker 
 
blight n) any factor that causes decay or deterioration 
The blight that killed Blake's corn was responsible for the destruction of crops throughout the county.   blightingly unblighted, unblightedly, unblightedness
blithe cheerful 
Blythe was know for her blithe spirit; she was always happy and cheerful.
blitheful, blithefullly, blithely, blitheness, blithesome overblithe
bombast pompous or pretentious talk or writing 
Be sure that your speech isn’t pretentious or inflated, as the audience has no time to listen to bombast.
bombastic, bombastically, bombaster
bonhomie friendliness 
Bonnie had many friends who admired her kind nature and bonhomie.   bonhomous
boor a person who is rude, clumsy, and lacking social manners 
Boris was a boor at the dinner party; after telling the host that her house was cheaply decorated, he ate his steak with his fingers and burped during the meal.
boorish, boorishly, boorishness
Be careful not to confuse a boor (a rude person) with a bore (a boring person). 
bromide a common saying 
As true as the old bromides are, such as “It is better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all,” none of them are much comfort to a newly-broken heart.
bromidic, bromidically 
bucolic relating to country life; rural 
The farmer lived a bucolic lifestyle, rising with the sun to tend the farm and retiring at sundown.   bucolical, bucolically 
burgeon to flourish 
Under the mayor's direction, the quiet town burgeoned into an active city.
burnish to polish 
In preparation for his dinner party, Bernie burnished the silverware and serving platters.
burnishable, burnishment, burnisher unburnished 
byzantine highly complex or intricate 
In a home loan, the byzantine language and unfamiliar terminology can be intimidating to a first-time home buyer.
cabal a secret group of plotters or schemers 
The cabal met in a church basement to plan the overthrow of the government.
caballer cabala
cacophony harsh, jarring sound 
On the first day of school, the band’s output was a cacophony of trumpets and horns; however, by the end of the year, the horn section blended well with the rest of the ensemble.
cacophonic, cacophonous, cacophonously 
cajole to influence by gentle urging, caressing, or flattering 
Caleb cajoled his mother into letting him borrow the car by telling her how young and pretty she looked today.   cajolement, cajolingly, cajolery, cajoler 
callous insensitive; emotionally hardened 
The senator’s callous indifference to the suffering of the people in the war-torn country cost him reelection.
callously, callousness callus
calumny a false statement intended to harm someone’s reputation 
Callie delivered the calumny about Brittany to an audience in the cafeteria; she hoped the lie would keep the other girl from becoming Prom queen.
calumniate, calumniation, calumnious, calumniously, calumniatory, calumniator
canard false story or rumor 
The belief that Napoleon was short is a canard; he was actually 5'7", an above average height for a Frenchman in 1800.
canonical ) authorized or accepted 
Pluto is no longer a canonical planet; due to its small mass, it was reclassified as a “dwarf planet” in 2006. canonically, canon, canonic uncanonical, uncanonically
cantankerous ill-tempered and unwilling to cooperate 
The cantankerous old man took the little boy’s sucker and refused to give it back. cantankerously, cantankerousness capricious apt to change suddenly 
Cane’s capricious personality made him a fun friend but a terrible boss; social spontaneity was exciting but workplace unpredictability was frustrating.
capriciously, capriciousness, caprice
cartographer a person who makes maps 
Amerigo Vespucci was one of the first cartographers to create a map of North America.
cartography, cartograph, cartographic, cartographical, cartographically
castigate to criticize or punish severely 
Cassie was castigated by her parents and the school principal for her role in the cheating scam.
castigation, castigative, castigatory, castigator
cataclysm a violent upheaval 
The political uprising against the dictator is a cataclysm that will hopefully result in a more democratic regime.
cataclysmic, cataclysmically, cataclysmal catastrophe
cathartic inducing a release of tense emotions 
Painting was a cathartic exercise for Cathy; through her paintings she was able to release anger and fear.   cathartically, catharticalness 
catholic universal; liberal 
Cathy had very catholic tastes, enjoying a wide array of food and drink.
catholically, catholicly, catholicalness, catholicness
caustic burning or stinging 
Cosette's caustic remark stung Kent; he could handle criticism about his job, but her bitter words were personal.
caustically, causticly, causticness, causticity
cavalier a man who is chivalrous and gallant 
The young cavalier was rewarded for his gallant behavior when he was chosen to escort the princess to the ball.   cavalier (adj.), cavalierly, cavalierness, cavalierism
censure strong disapproval 
High school teachers voiced their censure of the new novel due to mature themes and profanity.   censurer, censureless miscensure, precensure, procensure
charlatan a person who falsely claims to possess skills or knowledge; an imposter 
The charlatan tricked the unsuspecting customers out of money by pretending to be able to predict the future. charlatanic, charlatanish, charlatanical, charlatanically, charlatanistic, charlatanry, charlatanism
chary cautious; timid; choosy 
Charlie was chary of sitting on the wobbly chair; he was afraid it would break under his weight.
charily unchary 
chicanery the use of tricks to deceive someone 
The con artist relied on chicanery to get his victims to reveal their Social Security numbers; he promised them a tropical vacation for simply listing their personal information.   chicane, chicaner 
churlish rude and vulgar 
Cheryl did not think the man’s churlish jokes were appropriate, and asked that he apologize for his vulgarity.   churlishly, churlishness, churl 
circumlocution an indirect way of expressing something 
Sergio hoped that his circumlocution would stall the reporters long enough to think of a better answer to their question.
circumlocutory, circumlocutorily, circumlocutional, circumlocutionary
circumscribed restricted 
Her driving privileges are circumscribed by the state; she is only allowed to drive at night if she is returning from work.
circumscribable, circumscriber circle 
circumspect cautious; discreet 
Given the recent theft of passwords, you need to be circumspect when sharing personal information on the internet.
circumspectly, circumspectness noncircumspect, noncircumspectly, noncircumspectness 
clandestine secret 
The school administrators held clandestine meetings about the school uniform policy; they were afraid that if the public knew they were contemplating a new policy, the outcry would squash the issue.
clandestinely, clandestineness, clandestinity
cloying wearying through excess 
Her perfume smelled sweet at first but became cloying after sitting in the car with her for an hour.
cloy, cloyingly uncloying 
coalesce to blend into one  The two streams coalesced into a river. 
coalescence, coalescent noncoalescence, noncoalescent
coffer a box for storing valuables; funds 
Keifer depleted the organizations coffers, but his plan was to replenish the funds.
cofferlike 
cogent convincing; telling 
Craig presents a cogent argument through sound evidence and logical conclusions.
cogency, cogently noncogent, noncogently, uncogent, uncogently
collusion a secret agreement; conspiracy 
The founding fathers worked in collusion to revolt against the British government.
collusive, collusively, collusory noncollusion, noncollusive 
collude
conciliate to win over; to make peace 
The manager was able to conciliate the angry customer by offering her a fifty dollar gift certificate.
conciliable, conciliation, conciliatory, conciliatorily, conciliatoriness reconcile
concomitant existing or occurring at the same time 
Building a home can be an exciting process, but it also has concomitant stress associated with difficult decisions.
concomitant (n.), concomitantly, concomitance
conflagration a destructive fire 
The fire department determined that the conflagration in the old warehouse was a result of faulty wiring.
conflagrative, conflagrate, conflagrant
conspicuous obvious 
The realtor put the “For Sale” sign in a conspicuous spot in the front yard so that people in traffic could easily see it.
conspicuously, conspicuousness, conspicuity 
inconspicuous, inconspicuously, inconspicuousness 
consummate perfect and complete 
Constantine is the consummate host; he greets his guests, makes sure they are comfortable and enjoying themselves, and introduces new friends to everyone.
consummate (vb.), consummately, consummatory, consummation, consummator
contrite feeling guilty and remorseful 
The contrite criminal broke into sobs as he apologized to the victim’s family for the suffering he had caused.   contritely, contriteness, contrition
contumacious willfully disobedient 
The contumacious convict spat at the judge and refused to acknowledge his sentence.
contumaciously, contumaciousness, contumacity noncontumacious, noncontumaciously, noncontumaciousness contumely, contumelious, contumeliously, contumliousness
 
convoluted: ( ) complicated 
Connor was unable to finish the seventeenth-century novel due to the convoluted language of the period. convolutedly, convolutedness involuted corpulent excessively fat 
The corpulent man purchased two adjacent airline seats in order to have a more comfortable flight.
corpulently, corpulence, corpulency 
corroborate to confirm or support with evidence 
Coral’s thesis was corroborated by three supporting paragraphs, each presenting an example that proved her main idea.
corroborated, corroboration, corroborative, corroboratively, corroboratory, corroborant, corroborator   uncorroborated
cosset to pamper 
Cossette cosseted the puppy, providing him with diamond collars, caviar dinners, and doggy massages.
cosseted uncosseted 
coterie an exclusive group of people; a clique 
The town's wealthiest socialites formed a coterie and few people were able to gain entrance to the circle.
craven cowardly 
Rather than face her landlord and explain the damage to the house, the craven tenant packed up and moved in the night.
craven (n), cravenly, cravenness uncraven 
crescendo peak of growth 
The cheers in the audience reached a crescendo when the concert headliner was introduced.
decrescendo crescent
culpable worthy of blame 
The jury found the suspect culpable for the break-ins.
culpability, culpableness, culpably nonculpable, nonculpableness, nonculpably exculpate, culprit
cumbersome clumsy, awkward, and heavy 
The old television set was cumbersome, making it difficult to move into the other room.
cumbersomely, cumbersomeness cumber, encumber 
cupidity excessive greed 
Cullen's downfall was his cupidity; he couldn't walk away with the money he had already embezzled and was caught when he went back for more.
cupidinous
curmudgeon cranky, difficult person 
The old curmudgeon complained about every part of his meal.
curmudgeonly cur
cynical distrusting and pessimistic 
Cyndi’s cynical attitude made it hard for her to believe in anyone’s good intentions.   cynically, cynicism, cynic
dalliance the deliberate act of delaying and playing instead of working 
Dalton’s dalliance at the basketball court kept him from working on the term paper that was due tomorrow.
dally, dallyingly, dallier dilly-dally
daunt to cause to lose courage 
Don had finally worked up the courage to ride the roller coaster when he was daunted by the pale faces of the riders who had just completed the ride.
dauntingly, dauntingness dauntless, dauntlessly, dauntlessness, undaunted, undauntedly
dearth a lack in supply 
During the Second World War, the dearth of male baseball players led to the creation of a women’s baseball league. debunk to prove untrue 
The reporter debunked the urban legend about the witch in the woods by revealing wild goats as the sources of the noises.
debunker
debutante a young woman making her debut into society 
The debutantes were introduced at a formal ball, after which they were considered members of the aristocratic society.
declivity a downward slope 
The backyard's declivity caused rainwater to wash down it, creating a pool of standing water at the bottom of the slope.
declivitous, declivous, declivent acclivity 
decorous proper and dignified 
The decorous host made sure that she had proper table settings; each was arranged correctly for the five-course meal.
decorously, decorousness indecorous, indecorously, indecorousness   decorum
deject to lower someone’s spirits; make downhearted 
The news of her father’s declining condition dejected Denise, as she had been sure his health was starting to improve.
dejected (adj.), dejectedly, dejectedness, dejectory, dejection reject, eject
deleterious harmful 
The deleterious effects of cigarette smoking, such as lung cancer, are highlighted in the public service campaign.   deleteriously, deleteriousness delete
delineate to outline 
In her speech, Delilah clearly delineated her plans for changing several policies should she be elected class president.
delineable, delineative, delineation, delineament, delineatory, delineator undelineated 
demagogue a political leader who seeks support by appealing to popular passions and prejudices  Hitler was a demagogue who gained power by exploiting religious prejudices in Germany.
demagoguery, demagogism, demagogic, demagogical, demagogically 
demarcate to set, mark, or draw the boundaries of something 
The twins demarcated the room after their fight; Demarcus was only allowed access to the right side of their room, while Demonte had to stay on the left side.
demarcation, demarcator
demur to object 
I was surprised when my father did not demur to me attending the rival college of his alma mater. 
demurrable, demurral, demurrer undemurring 
denigrate to damage the reputation of 
The candidate hoped to denigrate his opponent’s character by exposing the embezzlement scandal.
denigration, denigrative, denigratory, denigrator
derelict a person without a home, job, or property 
The derelict spent his days begging on the street corner and his nights sleeping in the alley.
derelict (adj.), derelictly, derelictness, dereliction relinquish
deride to ridicule 
The unsupportive team captain derided Desiree’s attempts to make the volleyball squad.
deridingly, derision, derisive, derisible, derider
derivative something that came from an original 
The Pilates exercise system is a derivative of the ancient Indian practice of yoga.
derivative (adj.), derivatively, derivativeness, derive, derivation 
desiccate to dry up 
When the flowers in my bouquet desiccate, I can preserve them as dried flowers. desiccation, desiccative, desiccated, desiccator 
despoiler a person who steals goods 
The despoilers from the pirate ship stripped the village members of all their possessions. despoil, despoilment spoils (n.)
despot a ruler with complete power 
The despot was a harsh ruler who imposed outrageous taxes and unreasonable upon against his subjects.
despotic, despotical, despotically, despotism
destitute completely wanting or lacking (usually money, food, and shelter) 
The homeless man wasn’t always destitute; he once had a job, but poor money management led to bankruptcy.   destitutely, destituteness, destitution
desultory disconnected and random 
People wondered about Desiree's mental state when her conversation turned desultory; she jumped from topic to topic with seemingly no connection.
desultorily, desultoriness, desultorious 
diaphanous sheer; nearly translucent 
Daphne would be wise to wear a slip under that diaphanous skirt.
diaphanously, diaphanousness, diaphaneity nondiaphanous, nondiaphanously 
diatribe bitter criticism; verbal attack 
It was clear from Diana's diatribes against her mother that their relationship was beyond repair.   diatribist 
dictum a formal statement 
The president released a dictum forbidding texting while at work.
didactic educational 
The children’s book is not only entertaining, but also didactic; the story teaches the dietary habits of marine animals.   didactical, didactically, didacticism, didact autodidactic, autodidact
diffident shy; reserved 
Daphne was diffident when she first made the team, but by the end of the season, she was clearly a leader on the court.
diffidently, diffidenness, diffidence nondiffident, nondiffidently, undiffident
dilatory intending to delay 
Dillon asked nearly twenty dilatory questions at the start of class in an attempt to postpone the scheduled math test.   dilatorily, dilatoriness delay
dilettante a person who engages in an activity (such as art) without serious intentions or inquiry 
Although Dylan started painting, he was merely a dilettante; his paintings were amateur attempts at a part-time hobby.
dilettantish, dilettanteism
dirge a funeral song 
As the dirge played, mournful cries could be heard throughout the funeral.
dirgeful
disabuse to free someone from false ideas 
Dixon believed tomatoes were vegetables but I disabused him of that idea when I revealed they are actually fruits.
disabusal 
discern to perceive or understand with sight or other senses  The captain discerned another ship in the fog.
discernible, discernibly, discernment, discernibility, discernableness, discerner
indiscernible, indiscernibly, indiscernibility, indiscernibleness
disdain a lack of respect accompanied by a feeling of intense dislike 
The suspect was looked upon with disdain by the detectives who investigated the terrible crime.
disdain (vb.), disdainful, disdainfully, disdainfulness deign
 
disenfranchise to deprive of voting rights 
American citizens who are convicted of a felony are disenfranchised, losing their right to vote in any election. disenfranchisement, disfranchise enfranchise, franchise disillusion to free from false beliefs 
As a young politician, Dane believed he could stop the corruption that ran through the county government, but he was quickly disillusioned by the extent of the illegal activity.
disillusionment, disillusive, disillusionize, disillusionist disingenuous insincere 
Denise’s disingenuous apology was just an attempt to get out of her punishment; she was not truly sorry for going to the concert without permission.
disingenuously, disingenuousness, disingenuity ingenuous, ingenuously, ingenuousness
genuine
disparage to belittle or criticize 
My mom’s feelings were hurt when I disparaged her cooking skills.
disparagement, disparaging (adj.), disparagingly, disparager
disparate different and distinct 
The mixture of three disparate styles—jazz, rock, and country—created a unique sound and a diverse audience.
disparately, disparateness disparity
dissembler a person who conceals his real feelings by professing false beliefs 
The dissembler pledged allegiance to the rebel group, but he was really working undercover for the opposing army.   dissemble, dissemblingly, dissemblance resemble, semblance
disseminate to spread widely 
The police hoped the information about the suspect would disseminate quickly; the more people who knew, the better chances of apprehending the wanted man.
dissemination, disseminative, disseminator 
dissonance harsh, jarring sound 
On the first day of school, the band’s output was a dissonance of trumpets and horns; however, by the end of the year, the horn section blended well with the rest of the ensemble.
dissonancy consonance assonance, resonance
distaff the female part of a family 
Driving skills clearly fell on the distaff side of the family; the ladies had clean driving records but the men had sixteen traffic tickets among them.
dither to be indecisive 
Dillon dithered on whether to go to business school or law school. 
ditherer, dithery 
diurnal daily; daytime 
Humans are diurnal creatures, so working the night shift can disrupt our natural sleep rhythms. 
diurnally, diurnalness undiurnal, undiurnally nocturnal 
divert to turn away from a course 
Traffic was diverted through side streets in order to avoid an accident on the main road.
divertedly, diversion, divertible invert, convert, revert
divine to predict using supernatural means 
Devina asked the psychic to divine her future using the crystal ball.
divinable, divinely, divineness, divination, divinator divine (adj)
doctrinaire impractical; insistent about one's own theory 
The doctor believed that the lack of exercise was the single cause of high blood pressure and was doctrinaire in his inability to accept genetic factors.
doctrinaire (n), doctrinairism nondoctrinaire, undoctrinaire 
dogmatic characterized by assertion of unproved or unprovable principles  The dogmatic scientist continued to publish his theory, despite the fact that it was unproven.
dogmatically, dogmaticalness, dogmatize, dogmatism, dogmatist dogma draconian adj) harsh and severe 
In the novel, the king used draconian forms of punishment—such as torture or starvation—on any one caught plotting against the monarchy.
draconic, draconically
droll amusing; comical 
The droll little man amused the children with his odd gait and his quaint way of speaking.   drollness, drolly, drollery
dubious doubtful; questionable 
The candidate’s dubious past came back to haunt her in the election.
dubiously, dubiousness, dubitable indubious, indubiously 
doubt
dupe to deceive 
Dupree was duped into investing in the scam.
dupe (n), dupable, dupability, duper, dupery undupable 
dyspeptic irritable and gloomy 
Dyson was dyspeptic about his acceptance into business school; everyone tried to cheer him up, but he was convinced he would be rejected.
dyspeptically nondyspeptic, nondyspeptical, nondyspeptically 
earnest serious; sincere 
The earnest student took the SAT seriously; he bought several study guides, and dedicated two hours a day to practice.
earnestly, earnestness 
ebullient extremely excited or enthusiastic 
The ebullient child clapped her hands and jumped up and down as she waited to ride the pony at the party.   ebulliently, ebullience 
eclectic made up of choices from diverse sources 
Mrs. Eckert has an eclectic music collection; her albums span from classic jazz to hip hop to disco.
eclectically, eclecticist select
edify to benefit by instruction 
The art teacher edified his students by taking them to a premier art gallery to teach about painting techniques.   edifier, edifyingly, edifying, reedify nonedified, unedified 
efficacious effective 
The pest repellent was efficacious in keeping the mosquitoes away; none of the guests were bothered by the bugs.
efficaciously, efficaciousness, efficacy, efficacity
inefficacious, inefficaciously, inefficaciousness, inefficacy, inefficacity
effect, effective
effigy a representation of someone 
The mayor's effigy was unveiled as a sculpture in the park, erected to honor his lifelong service.   effigial 
effrontery shameless boldness 
She had the effrontery to imply that I was pregnant when in fact I had just gained some weight.
effusive excessive enthusiasm or emotion 
Effie’s effusive praise was so excessive and over-the-top that it almost seemed insincere.
effusively, effusiveness effuse, infuse
egalitarian characterized by the belief in equal rights for all people 
Edgar’s egalitarian beliefs made him an excellent husband; he divided the housework equally, helping his wife with cooking, cleaning, and childcare.
egalitarian (n.), egalitarianism, egality equality
egregious outrageously bad or offensive 
Edie made the egregious mistake of asking the slightly overweight woman if she were expecting a baby.
egregiously, egregiousness
elegy n) a sad poem or song 
"To An Athlete Dying Young" is a heartbreaking elegy written by A. E. Housman. elegize, elegist elicit to call or bring out 
The woman elicits sympathy from her audience by telling the story of her difficult childhood.
elicitation, elicitor solicit elicit is often confused with illicit, which means illegal eloquent expressing oneself powerfully and effectively The minister’s eloquent sermon stirred the members of the church.
eloquently, eloquence   ineloquent, ineloquently, ineloquence 
elucidate to make clear by explanation 
The story in the newspaper elucidated some of the details of the mystery that had previously raised questions.
elucidation, elucidative, elucidatory, elucidator lucid
embroil to bring into an argument or negative situation 
Emory is embroiled in a lawsuit with his former landlord over the condition of the apartment when he moved out.   embroilment, embroiler
eminent distinguished and prominent 
The eminent professor has taught at distinguished colleges, which is why he is such a remarkable addition to the faculty.
eminently, eminence eminent is often confused with imminent, which means about to occur
emissary a person sent on a mission to represent the interests of someone else  The general sent an emissary to the enemy’s camp to inquire about the terms of surrender.   emission, emissive, emit
emollient that which has a softening or soothing effect, especially to the skin  Emmaline applied an emollient lotion to the rough calluses on her hands.
emollient (adj.), emollience
empirical resulting from an experiment 
As a scientist, Emmie relied on empirical data every day, which is why it was hard for her to trust her intuition.   empirically, empiricalness
emulate to imitate in order to match or excel 
Emily hoped to emulate her older sister’s success on the tennis court.
emulative, emulatively, emulation, emulator
encomium high praise 
The chairwoman delivered an encomium about Enzo before introducing him as the employee of the month.   encomia
endemic natural to a local area 
Fire ants are endemic to the southeastern coastal plains, but they have started to migrate to the interior. 
endemically, endemism nonendemic, unendemic epidemic, pandemic
enervated lacking strength or vigor 
After an entire weekend of moving furniture, Enrico was enervated; he would need to rest to get his strength back.   enervate (vb.), enervation, enervative, enervator 
engender to produce 
Divorce can engender feelings of anger, loss, and powerlessness.
engenderer, engenderment unengendered generate
enigma a puzzle 
The dog’s escape from the pen is an enigma; no one can figure out how she broke out of the locked enclosure.
enigmata (plural), enigmatic, enigmatical, enigmatically ennui boredom 
The monotony of my job produces utter ennui. 
enumerate vb) to count; to name one by one The blog enumerated the top five study tips for the GRE.
enumerative, enumerator, enumerable nonenumerated, nonenumerative 
numeral, number
ephemeral lasting a very short time 
Effie’s sadness over her breakup is ephemeral; she will quickly find a new boyfriend to help her forget the last.
ephemeral (n.), ephemerally, ephemeralness, ephemerality, ephemerous, ephemeron
epicure a person with refined tastes, particularly of food and wine 
The reality show features several epicures judging the cooking skills of America's best chefs. 
epicurean, epicureous, epicurism 
epistolary relating to letters 
The couple has an epistolary relationship; although they have never met, they communicate regularly through letters.
epistle, epistolatory, epistolic, epistolical, epistolize, epistoler, epistolist 
equanimity steadiness of mind under stress 
Eva made an excellent emergency room doctor because she handled trauma with equanimity; she was clear-headed during the most stressful situations.
equanimous, equanimously, equanimousness longanimity
equivocal uncertain; open to multiple interpretations 
The politician’s equivocal statement about the environment could support either side of the issue.
equivocality, equivocacy, equivocally, equivocalness
unequivocal, unequivocally, unequivocalness
ersatz artificial; serving to substitute 
Aspertame is an ersatz sugar that has caused a lot of controversy in recent years. 
erudition knowledge gained from study 
Erik’s erudition is sure to help him win a lot of money on the trivia-based quiz show.
eruditional, erudite, eruditely, eruditeness
eschew to avoid; to shun 
Attempting to follow a low carb diet, Essie eschewed all foods containing sugar.   eschewal, eschewer uneschewed
esoteric intended for a select group of people; secret or confidential 
Esteban was a member of an esoteric club, whose membership consisted strictly of men over fifty who lived in the city.
esoterically, esotericism, esotericist exoteric, exoterically, exotericism
espouse to adopt or marry (such as an idea or cause) 
Although Esmerelda had never practiced a formal religion, she espoused her fiancé’s faith in order to join his church.
espousal, espouser spouse 
ethos the spirit or attitude of a group 
The ethos of 4-H is education resulting in positive change for the community.
eulogy a formal expression of praise (often delivered at funerals) 
The director delivered a eulogy about the center’s most helpful volunteer, praising her for helping the needy.   eulogize, eulogist
euphemism an inoffensive word or phrase used in place of one that is hurtful or harsh 
In the hospital's yearly report, the euphemism "negative patient outcome" is used instead of "death."
euphemistic, euphemistically, euphemist, euphemistical, euphemious, euphemously, euphemize   uneuphemistic, uneuphemistical 
euphony pleasant sound 
When the orchestra started to play, a euphony ensued that made audience members smile.
euphonize, euphonious, euphoniously, euphoniousness 
noneuphonious, noneuphoniously, noneuponiousness 
 
evanescent vanishing 
Many people believe that youth is evanescent, quickly vanishing before it can be truly appreciated. evanescently, evanesce, evanescence vanish exacerbate to increase the harshness or bitterness of 
My headache was exacerbated by the child playing drums on the pots and pans. exacerbatingly, exacerbation acerbate exacerbate is often confused with exasperate (meaning to irritate).
exasperate to intensely irritate 
The airline passenger was exasperated by the last minute cancellation of his flight.
exasperatedly, exasperatingly, exasperation, exasperator
asperate
exasperate is often confused with exacerbate (meaning to increase).
exculpate to clear from blame 
The arson suspect was exculpated when forensics revealed that the fire had been the result of faulty wiring.
exculpable, exculpation, exculpatory culpable, culprit 
inculpate, inculpable, inculpation, inculpably, inculpatory, inculpability, inculpableness
exegesis an explanation or critical interpretation (especially of the Bible) 
The minister is delivering an exegesis on the first two books of the Bible, where he will interpret the lessons from Genesis and Exodus and apply them to modern times.
exegetic, exegetical, exegetically, exegete, exegetist 
exigent urgent; demanding 
This is an exigent matter: if you don't reach the client in time, we stand to lose millions of dollars.
exigently, exigence nonexigent, nonexigently, unexigent, unexigently 
exonerate to clear from blame 
The use of DNA helped exonerate the innocent man; twenty years after he was sent to prison, he was released.   exoneration, exonerative, exonerator
exorbitant greatly exceeding bounds of reason or moderation 
am forced to stop shopping at that grocery store until the owners lower the exorbitant prices on meats and produce.
exorbitantly, exorbitance
expatriate a person who lives outside his own country, often to renounce allegiance 
The little village in Costa Rica is filled with American expatriates who moved there for a more relaxed lifestyle.
expatriate (vb.), expatriation patriot
explicator a person who explains or interprets 
My attorney was an excellent explicator; he clearly interpreted each clause of the legal contract.
explicate, explication, explicative, explicatively, explicatory explicit 
explicit clearly expressed or demonstrated 
Mr. Jones left explicit directions for the substitute so he was surprised when they were not followed.
explicitly, explicitness inexplicit, inexplicitly, implicit, implicitly, implicitness
exponent one who explains or interprets 
The teacher was an exponent of turn of the century literature, explaining the themes that populated novels at that time.
exponent (adj), exponential, exponentially nonexponential, nonexponentially
expurgate to revise by removing offensive text; to purify by cleansing 
Recent versions of Huckleberry Finn have been expurgated to remove racial slurs and references.
expurgated, expurgation, expurgator unexpurgated 
extemporaneous done without advance preparation 
was not expecting to be called to the stage, so I gave an extemporaneous speech. 
extemporary, extemporaneity, extemporaneously, extemporarily, extemporaneousness, extemporariness extol to praise highly 
The critic extolled the works of Shakespeare, citing them as the most important contribution to the English language.   extollingly, extolment, extoller
extraneous not relevant or essential 
When studying for the SAT, be sure to ignore the extraneous information in the book, such as the history of the test. extraneously, extraneousness extra
exuberant overflowing, especially with joy 
The young wife was exuberant when her husband returned safely from the military after a year-long tour of duty.
exuberantly, exuberance, exuberate facetious not intended to be taken seriously 
Fatima, who hated getting her teeth cleaned, was being facetious when she said, “I love going to the dentist!” facetiously, facetiousness
fallacy a false idea 
Many textbooks teach the fallacy that George Washington cut down a cherry tree; it is widely believed that an author made up that story to increase the sales of his book.
fallacious, fallaciously, fallaciousness 
fallible capable of making a mistake 
Fallon knew that her boyfriend was fallible, but she was still disappointed to learn that he had lied to her.
fallibly, fallibility, fallibleness infallible, infallibly, infallibility, infallibleness   fall
fallow not in use 
The fallow field had not been used for crops in over a decade so the farmer had to till and aerate the soil.
fallowness unfallowed 
fastidious giving careful attention to detail; hard to please 
Mrs. Foster, my teacher, is a fastidious grader; she deducts points for any error in grammar, punctuation, or spelling.   fastidiously, fastidiousness unfastidious
fatuous foolish and silly 
The professor made a fatuous argument that everyone dismissed due to its extreme foolishness.
fatuously, fatuousness
fawn to seek attention through flattery 
The associate fawned over his supervisor in an attempt to receive a raise.
fawner, fawningly, fawningness 
fecund productive; fruitful 
The fecund field has been producing record-setting crops for many years.
fecundity, fecundate, fecundator, fecundatory
felicity pleasing and appropriate style; happiness 
The book review highlighted both the felicities and the imperfections of the novel.
felicitous, felicitously, felicitousness infelicity, infelicitous, infelicitously
fervid hot or passionate 
The fervid senator fought passionately for victim's rights.
fervidity, fervidly, fervidness nonfervid, nonfervidly, nonfervidness 
fervent
fetid stinky; smelling of decay 
hated turning the compost pile because of its fetid smell.   fetidly, fetidness, fetidity 
flippant disrespectful; lacking seriousness 
Floyd was grounded for making flippant remarks about the new rules his father set for him.
flippantly, flippantness, flippancy 
flotsam floating wreckage or useless, discarded items 
In the filthy city, the gullies are filled with flotsam that finds its way into the sewer after a heavy rain.
jetsam Flotsam originally referred to the floating wreckage of a boat, while jetsam referred to the items discarded by a ship in distress. Both are loosely used today to refer to useless, discarded items.
foible a minor flaw or weakness of character  Foster’s only foible is his inability to make a decision.   feeble
fomentation a push for trouble or rebellion 
The juniors would not have participated in skip day if it weren’t for the fomentation of their senior friends.
foment, fomenter
foppish affecting extreme elegance in dress and manner The foppish fellow wore a three piece suit and a top hat to the wedding.
foppishly, foppishness, foppery, fop 
ford a shallow portion of a river used for crossing 
Pioneers often would travel miles out of their way in order to find a ford that would allow them to safely cross a river.
ford (vb), fordable 
formidable causing fear due to powerful strength 
Forrest is a formidable opponent on the tennis court; he has not lost a set in his last twenty games.
formidably, formidableness, formidabilty 
fortuitous fortunate; by chance 
Getting stuck in an elevator with a head hunter on my way to a job interview turned out to be a fortuitous event.
fortuitously, fortuitousness, fortuity nonfortuitous, nonfortuitously, nonfortuitousness fortunate
foster to encourage or care for 
The arts foundation hopes to foster art education in the schools by donating supplies and materials.
fostered (adj.), fosteringly, fosterer
fractious unruly; irritable 
Fido was a fractious dog who refused to cooperate even after months of obedience classes.
fractiously, fractiousness unfractious, unfractiously, unfractiousness
frenetic frantic 
The castaways were frenetic in waving down the rescue plane.
frenetically, frenetical nonfrenetic, nonfrenetically
frivolous not serious; silly 
The author’s new novel is a frivolous look at life in the city; although it lacks the serious tones of his previous novels, it’s a fun and enjoyable story.
frivolously, frivolousness, frivolity, frivol, frivoler
frugal characterized by the avoidance of excessive spending 
A frugal shopper will always wait for items to go on sale or clearance before purchasing them.
frugally, frugalness, frugality
fulminate to explode loudly or to loudly pronounce 
Phil was angry at his boss and fulminated his frustrations to his coworkers at lunch.
fulminator, fulminatory, fulmination nonfulminating, unfulminated, unfulminating 
furtive sneaky 
Frank devised a furtive plan in which he would sneak onto the rival’s campus and steal their school flag.   furtively, furtiveness
gambol to skip and frolic 
Grandma was a fun friend; she gamboled through the field with me, collecting flowers and chasing butterflies.
garner to earn or to collect 
Garrett garnered a reputation as a fierce lawyer after winning the trial amid national scrutiny.   ungarnered 
garrulous excessively talkative or wordy 
The garrulous hairdresser talked the entire time he cut my hair.
garrulously, garrulousness, garrulity genial polite and friendly 
It’s important for a kindergarten teacher to be genial; young children respond positively to a friendly adult.
genially, genialness, geniality congenial
germane related to; relevant 
have some ideas germane to the discussion that might resolve some of the issues we are having. germanely, germaneness nongermane, ungermane glib fluent and talkative, often insincerely so 
The glib salesman promised me that the car had been inspected, but the transmission blew two days after I bought it. glibly, glibness unglib, unglibly
glower to stare with dislike or anger Mr. Glover glowered at me after I walked on his flowers.
gloweringly unglowering, ungloweringly 
gradation gradual or successive changes 
The bumble bee can see subtle gradations in color that humans are unable to notice.
gradational, gradationally regradation
gratuitous free; given without reason 
On Monday, our supervisor announced that all employees were receiving two gratuitous tickets to this weekend’s concert.
gratuitously, gratuitousness, gratuity
gregarious sociable 
Greg is a gregarious student who finds it difficult to avoid socializing during class.
gregariously, gregariousness ungregarious
grievous causing grief or very serious 
During the war, families feared news from a grievous telegram indicating that their loved one had been injured or killed.
grievously, grievousness nongrievous, nongrievously, nongrievousness
grovel lowering oneself as in asking forgiveness or showing respect  Grover groveled for forgiveness from his mother after he broke her favorite vase.
groveler, grovelingly ungroveling 
guile a skillful deception 
The sneaky woman used guile to get close to the withdrawn millionaire; she pretended to have known his brother who died in the war.
guileful, guilefully, guilefulness guileless, guilelessly, guilelessness   guise, disguise 
gustatory relating to the sense of taste 
The restaurant provides a gustatory experience by offering skewers of beef, pork, and poultry marinated in exotic oils.
gustatorily, gustation, gustative, gustativeness
hackneyed repeated too often; overfamiliar through overuse 
Instead of relying on hackneyed clichés in your essay, try to create original metaphors and similes.   hackney (vb.)
halcyon joyful, peaceful, or prosperous 
During the company’s halcyon days, the employees were making higher than average wages and enjoying benefits unmatched by other corporations.
halcyonian, halcyonic
hapless unlucky 
The hapless fellow was in a car accident on the same day he lost the winning lottery ticket.
haplessly, haplessness 
harangue a long, pompous speech 
At the assembly, the principal delivered a harangue on the merits of perfect attendance and good behavior.
harangue (vb.), harangueful, haranguer
hedonist a person dedicated to the pursuit of pleasure 
After working for years as a hospice nurse, Heidi had no respect for the hedonist who lived next door; by only seeking pleasure, he left the more unpleasant activities to caretakers like Heidi.
hedonist (adj.), hedonistic, hedonistically, hedonism, hedonic, hedonically
 
hegemony leadership 
The country exerted its hegemony over the smaller territories.
hegemonic, hegemonical antihegemony heretical characteristic of an opinion at odds with accepted beliefs 
Many people in the church believe the heretical teaching of evolution should be banned.
heresy, heretic, heretically, hereticalness nonheretical, nonheretically 
hermetic isolated and protected 
Many of the sea islands were hermetic during the Civil War, making them a safe place for runaway slaves to hide.   hermetical, hermetically unhermetic hermit
histrionic overly dramatic 
The histrionic patient pretended to faint when he saw the needle used for the vaccination.
histrionic (n.), histrionics, histrionical, histrionically
hoary old or stale 
Harry tells the same hoary stories at every dinner party.
hoarily, hoariness unhoary 
hubris pride; arrogance 
If pride goes before a fall, hubris goes before a downfall.
hubristic nonhubristic, unhubristic 
husband to manage wisely or thriftily 
Henry husbanded his finances so that he would have plenty to live on in retirement.
husbander unhusbanded husband (n)
iconoclast a person who who attacks cherished ideas or traditional institutions 
Many religious leaders accused the author of being an iconoclast for presenting evidence that contrasted with the religion’s long-standing beliefs.
iconoclastic, iconoclastically, iconoclasm
idiosyncrasy a characteristic that is peculiar to a specific person 
Some people found Ida’s idiosyncrasy a source of humor, but I never made fun of her for wearing her shirt backwards.
idiosyncratic, idiosyncratically
idolatrous great adoration 
The young girl's idolatrous worship of the teen heartthrob began to worry her mother.
idolatry, idolatrously, idolatrousness 
nonidolatrous, nonidolatrously, nonidolatrousness idol, idolize
ignoble dishonorable; common 
Your ignoble behavior at the dinner party will keep you off of invitation lists in the future.
ignobility, ignobleness, ignobly noble, nobility, nobly 
ignominious disgraceful and shameful 
Izzy’s ignominious crime brought shame and embarrassment to her entire family.
ignominiously, ignominiousness, ignominy
illusory creating illusions; deceiving 
The illusory sweepstakes isn’t really a contest at all; “winners” think they have won a free cruise, but the trip actually costs several hundred dollars and requires attendance at marketing seminars.
illusorily, illusoriness, illusive illusion
imbue to inspire 
After the seminar, our supervisor was imbued with the teachings of the keynote speaker, a management expert.   imbuement unimbue 
immutable unchangeable 
We are born with some immutable characteristics, such as race, gender, height, and eye color. 
immutability, immutableness, immutably mutable mutation
impasse blocked progress; deadlock 
We came to an impasse in our discussion about our wedding colors; we both refused to compromise.
impecunious poor 
In less than a year, Imogen had lost all of her money, going from a wealthy businesswoman to a impecunious beggar. impecuniously, impecuniousness, impecuniosity 
imperturbable calm; incapable of agitation 
Imelda had imperturbable composure, which is why she was selected to tackle the nerve-wracking feat. imperturbability, imperturbableness, imperturbably perturb, perturbable impervious not capable of being affected 
Ima was impervious to Jack’s insults; nothing he said seemed to affect her.
imperviously, imperviousness, imperviable pervious, perviously, perviousness
impetuous impulsive 
While at the airshow to see old war planes, Ivan made an impetuous decision to go skydiving.
impetuously, impetuousness, impetuosity impetus
impious lacking respect or devotion, usually for a god or religion 
Imogene had a difficult time convincing her impious husband to attend church with the family.
impiously, impiousness pious, piously, piousness 
implacable incapable of being pacified or appeased 
Inez was so upset at the waiter that she became implacable; nothing the manager offered was going to make her happy.
implacability, implacableness, implacably placable, placably, placability placid
implicit implied though not directly expressed 
Although we never mentioned the fight, there seemed to be an implicit agreement not to talk about it.
implicitly, implicitness, implicity explicit, explicitly, explicitness
imprecation a curse 
The old woman dabbled in voodoo, and was known for casting imprecations on her enemies.
imprecate, imprecator, imprecatory unimprecated
impugn to attack as false or wrong 
The candidate impugned his opponent’s voting record, proving that she had voted against reform she now supports.   impugnable, impugnability, impugnment, impugner oppugn
impute to attribute or credit to 
The doctors imputed her sudden weight loss to a problem with her thyroid gland.
imputable, imputably, imputative, imputatively, imputativeness, imputedly, imputer 
putative
incarnadine red or pink; flesh-colored 
For Valentine's Day, I gave my girlfriend incarnadine carnations since red is the color of love and passion.
incarnadine (vb) carnation
inchoate in the early stages of development 
Your inchoate plan for the fund-raiser has a lot of potential, but we need to discuss some details before moving forward.
inchoately, inchoateness, inchoation, inchoative, inchoatively 
incipient beginning; just starting 
The zinc lozenges will help an incipient cold, but do nothing for a well-established virus.
incipiently, incipience, incipiency 
incontrovertible unquestionable; impossible to deny 
Protesters demanded the release of the imprisoned woman, saying there was incontrovertible proof of her innocence.
incontrovertibly, incontrovertibility, incontrovertibleness
controvertible, controvertibly, controvertibility, controvertibleness, controvert
incorrigible incapable of being corrected or punished 
The incorrigible child continued to throw his vegetables even after the mother threatened to send him to his room.
incorrigibly, incorrigibleness, incorrigibility 
corrigible, corrigibly, corrigibleness, corrigibility
incredulous skeptical; not willing to believe 
The incredulous car buyer did not believe the dealer’s claim that the car was accident-free; he insisted on seeing a report on the car’s history.
incredulously, incredulousness, incredulity incredible
credulous, credulously, credulousness, credulity
inculcate to teach through persistent repetition 
Ms. Ingles inculcated her students with a love of reading; many years later, an overwhelming majority reported that they were still voracious readers.
inculcation, inculcative, inculcator
indigenous native to 
Although the flower can now be found all over the eastern United States, it is indigenous to Florida.
indigenously, indigenousness, indigenity, indigen, indigene 
indignant displaying anger due to unfairness 
The seniors were indignant over their disqualification in the homecoming contest, claiming that the decision was unfair.
indignantly, indignation
indolent lazy 
India was an indolent worker, and was thus fired when it was discovered that she was lazy.
indolently, indolence 
ineffable incapable of being put into words 
Effie’s joy at being reunited with her long-lost brother was ineffable; words could not explain her happiness.   ineffably, ineffableness, ineffability effable
inexorable unyielding 
Mary Ingalls was aware that she would lose her sight before she began her inexorable decline into blindness.
inexorability, inexorably, inexorableness exorable
ingenious clever and inventive 
Jeannie invented an ingenious device for the beach that combined a cooler, radio, and portable fan.
ingeniously, ingeniousness, ingenuity genius
ingenue an artless, innocent young girl (especially as portrayed on the stage) 
The young actress will play the part of the ingenue, an innocent girl who becomes caught up in the plot in Act II.
ingenuous
ingrate an ungrateful person 
Inga came off as an ingrate when she failed to thank her hosts for dinner.
ingrately grateful
ingratiate to put oneself in another's good graces 
Ingrid's boyfriend ingratiated himself with her father by sharing a love of classic movies and old cars. 
ingratiation, ingratiatory, ingratiating
inherent existing as a natural and essential characteristic 
The abused dog had an inherent distrust of men, so only female volunteers at the shelter could get close to him.
inherently, inhere, inherence inherit
inimical harmful or hostile 
Oscar cast an inimical sneer at Melissa when she took credit for his idea.
inimically, inimicalness, inimicality, inimicable enemy
iniquity wickedness 
The wicked witch's iniquity kept Dorothy from returning to Kansas.
iniquitous, iniquitously, iniquitousness
innocuous harmless 
No one had to be evacuated after the tanker spill, as the gas released was innocuous.
innocuously, innocuousness, innocuity nocuous, nocuously, nocuousness   inoculate 
 
insidious adj) intended to entrap, deceive, or harm 
Sid devised an insidious plan to get the witness to admit he hadn’t really witnessed the crime.
insidiously, insidiousness insipid bland, dull, or uninteresting 
When I left for college, the insipid cafeteria food made me miss my father’s home-cooked meals. insipidly, insipidness, insipidity sipid, sipidity insolence rudeness 
The headmaster said that insolence would not be tolerated; rude behavior towards a teacher would result in suspension.
insolent (n.), insolently, insolence
insular narrow-minded; isolated 
The culture is criticized for its insular ideas, such as the belief that women should not be allowed to attend school.   insularly, insularism, insularity 
insurrection a rebellion or uprising 
King George ordered British troops to quash the colonist's insurrection, but the uprising led to the Revolutionary War.
insurrectional, insurrectionally, insurrectionism, insurrectionist
inter to bury 
James Garfield, the 20th President of the United States who was assassinated in 1881, was interred in Cleveland, Ohio.
reinter uninterred 
interlocutor a person who takes part in a conversation 
At the apartment complex, the two interlocutors continued to debate the merits of television outside my bedroom window until well after midnight.
interlocution, interlocutory, interlocutorily locution, eloquent
interregnum a period of time free from authority 
When the king died, there was a two week interregnum as the prince returned from abroad for his coronation.
interregnal 
intractable stubborn; difficult to manage 
The intractable child refused to let the babysitter into the room.   intractability, intractableness, intractably
intransigent refusing to yield or compromise 
When it came to Edgar’s hunting trophies, Enid was intransigent; she refused to hang the deer heads on the wall.   intransigent (n.), intransigently, intransigence, intransigency
inundate to flood 
After the newspaper ran the controversial story, the editor was inundated with calls from hundreds of angry subscribers.
inundation, inundatory, inundator
inure to become used to 
People in Alaska were inured to cold weather.
inuredness, inurement uninured 
invective violent criticism 
The governor was quick to issue an invective denouncing the show that portrayed her state's residents as vulgar and obscene.
invective (adj), invectively, invectiveness uninvective 
inveigle to persuade with smooth talk 
Vicki inveigled Vivianne into playing checkers, even though Vivianne would have rather played chess.
inveiglement, inveigler uninveigled
investiture ceremony for bestowing an official title  At the investiture, the detective was promoted to sergeant.   investitive 
invidious intended to hurt, offend, or discriminate 
Ivan’s invidious remarks to his wife shocked their guests; they had no idea that he could be so cruel.
invidiously, invidiousness
invoke to summon into action or bring into existence 
The psychic claimed that he could invoke the spirits in the house through an old-fashioned séance.
invocable, invocation, invocational, invoker evoke, provoke, revoke
irascible quickly aroused to anger 
The irascible old lady caused a scene at the restaurant by yelling at the manager when her hamburger was overcooked.
irascibly, irascibleness, irascibility ire
itinerant traveling from place to place to work 
The itinerant pastor was transferred to our church from a ministry in Ohio; he will stay with us for six months before going to New Hampshire.
itinerant (n.), itinerantly, itinerate, itineration itinerary
jettison to throw away 
Jett was arrested when he jettisoned old boat fuel into the harbor.   jettisonable 
jingoism noisy and excessive patriotism for one's country 
The candidate's jingoism cost him the election, as constituents did not believe he could tactfully handle foreign policy.
jingo, jingoish, jingoist, jingoistic, jingoistically
jocular characterized by joking 
Jack's speeches were always entertaining because they were peppered with jocular anecdotes.
jocularly, overjocular, jocularity joke
juncture a critical point in time 
At this juncture, I think it's important to merge the Human Resources and Marketing departments.
juxtapose to place side by side 
When Justin’s picture was juxtaposed with his father’s picture, the resemblance between the two was remarkable.   juxtaposition pose 
keen sharp as in a point, or sharp as in intelligence  It will take a keen mind to solve this difficult puzzle.
keenly, keenness
kindle to light up or to excite 
The novel "Jurassic Park" kindled his interest in dinosaurs.
kindler kindling
kinetic characterized by motion 
Some students are kinetic learners who learn best when they are moving around.
kinetically nonkinetic telekinesis, kinetics
knell sound of a bell at a funeral or a sign of looming death or destruction 
The town was quiet, with boarded up buildings and no sign of life, a knell of the impending war.   knell (vb) 
lachrymose tearful; sad 
Lakeisa tends to get lachrymose over animal rescue commercials depicting cats and dogs in abusive situations.   lachrymosely, lachrymosity
laconic expressing much in few words 
A laconic essay will be scored higher than an essay with unnecessary words or sentences. 
laconically, laconism unlaconic
lament to express grief; to mourn 
When Lamont left for college, his little sister lamented his absence for weeks.
lament (n.), lamentingly, lamentable, lamentably, lamenter unlamented
lampoon vb) to mock in a satire 
The actors of "Saturday Night Live" make a living by lampooning current events.
lampoon (n), lampooner, lampoonist, lampoonery unlampooned languid lacking in energy or spirit 
My boss's languid response to my proposal wasn't expected; I thought he'd be excited about my initiative and creativity.
languidly, languidness unlanguid, unlanguidly, unlanguidness   languish
lapidary relating to polished stones; characterized by exactness and extreme polishing  The author's lapidary manuscript was so carefully crafted that editors could find no mistakes.   lapidarian, lapidarist
largess generous gift-giving 
Larissa's largess at the twins' birthday party would not soon be forgotten; she gave them enough toys to keep them busy for a year.
large
lassitude lack of energy; weariness 
One symptom of the illness was lassitude; Leslie learned early on that she had no energy during an attack.
latent existing but not visible or obvious 
Latika clearly had latent ability in math, but she failed to put forward any effort in the subject so no one knew how bright she really was.
latently, latency 
laud to praise, glorify, or honor 
Landon was lauded for his achievements at the laboratory; he had made more progress in a year than most scientists had made in a decade.
laudable, laudably, laudation, laudative, laudatory, laudator 
lavish very generous or extravagant 
The lavish wedding reception had a steak and lobster dinner, several intricate ice sculptures, and a famous jazz band.
lavishly, lavishness, lavishment, lavisher
legerdemain trickery; sleight of hand 
The magician employed legerdemain to fool the audience into believing he pulled a rabbit from his hat.   legerdemainist
levity inappropriate lack of seriousness 
The teenagers' levity during the assembly on drinking and driving cost them six Saturdays in detention.
lexicography the act of writing dictionaries 
Noah Webster’s career in lexicography developed from his dissatisfaction with British school books; he wrote his first dictionary to help his elementary students learn to spell.
lexicographic, lexicographical, lexicographically, lexicographer lexicon, dyslexic 
liberate free; unrestrained 
When the farmer accidentally left the stall door open, the liberated horse sprinted for the woods.
liberated, liberative, liberatory, liberation, liberator unliberated
libertine unrestrained by morals 
Libby had no scruples and thus made libertine choices, never worrying about those affected or what others would think.
libertine (n), libertinage, libertinism
licentious unrestrained by morals 
Libby had no scruples and thus made licentious choices, never worrying about those affected or what others would think.
licentiously, licentiousness nonlicentious, nonlicentiously, nonlicentiousness   license
limpid clear; calm 
The limpid waters provided opportunity for the anglers to sight cast directly to the fish they could see in the clear water.
limpidity, limpidness, limpidly
lissome flexible 
The lissome gymnast dazzled the audience with her tumbling routine.
lissomely, lissomeness
listless lacking energy or spirit 
My boss's listless response to my proposal wasn't expected; I thought he'd be excited about my initiative and creativity.
listlessly, listlessness 
loquacious extremely talkative 
Lance was disappointed in his loquacious date; she talked so much that she never had time to listen to any of his stories.
loquaciously, loquaciousness, loquacity eloquent, ventriloquist, soliloquy
lucid clear; easy to understand 
If your directions had been more lucid, I might have made it to the party on time.
lucidly, lucidness, lucidity elucidate
lugubrious excessively mournful; sad and gloomy 
Lucy’s lugubrious behavior has started to annoy her friends; it has been two months since her breakup with Josh, but she is still as gloomy as if it had happened yesterday.
lugubriously, lugubriousness, lugubriosity 
luminous radiating light; enlightening; easily understood 
The meeting was luminous because we finally figured out the reason that the mayor was backing the construction project.
luminously, luminousness nonluminous, nonluminously, nonluminousness luminary, illuminate, luminescent
machination a crafty plot 
The fairy tale follows the machinations of an evil stepsister who is out to steal the prince from the heroine.   machinate, machinator
maelstrom a powerful whirlpool or turbulent chaos 
When the manager was fired, he left the office in a maelstrom; there was frequent infighting and little leadership.
magnanimous noble and generous in spirit 
The magnanimous donor has given over ten million dollars to children’s charities in the city.
magnanimously, magnanimousness, magnanimity
magnate an important person in a field of business 
Henry Ford was an automotive magnate, manufacturing the first automobile that was affordable to the middle class.   magnateship 
malediction a curse 
The members of the team feared that the old woman had placed a malediction upon their season because they hadn’t won a game since accidentally shattering her windshield with a foul ball.
maledictive, maledictory, maledict benediction, benedictive, benedictory   diction, dictate, dictionary
malevolent evil 
The malevolent old man plotted the demise of his neighbor’s barking dog.
malevolently, malevolence, malevolency 
malice a desire to make others suffer 
Malika’s sharp comment was delivered with malice; she knew that her words would hurt her mother’s feelings.   malicious, maliciously, maliciousness unmalicious
 
malinger vb) to fake an illness to avoid responsibility 
Malinda claims to have strep throat, but since she has been known to malinger in the past make sure she brings a doctor's note when she returns to work.
malingerer 
malleable capable of being shaped or influenced 
Mallory worried that her malleable son would learn inappropriate behavior from the older boys he played with at school.
malleably, malleableness, malleability unmalleable, unmalleability
malodorous having an unpleasant smell 
My malodorous shoe smelled so terrible that my mom threw it away.
malodorously, malodorousness odor, odorously
mar to make imperfect; to disfigure 
My nearly-perfect report card was marred by a low grade in speech class.
mar (n.), marred (adj.) unmarred
martial relating to war 
The mayor was in favor of taking a martial approach to the problem, preferring to send soldiers into the abandoned houses to remove the squatters and drug dealers. 
martialism, martialist, martially, martialness nonmartial 
martinet a person who rigidly demands that rules are followed; a strict disciplinarian 
Marty realized that the drill sergeant was a martinet, so his best course of action was to closely follow all the rules.   martinetish, martinetism
matriarch the female head of a family 
As the matriarch of the family, Grandma sat at the head of the Thanksgiving dinner table.
matriarchal, matriarchic, matriarchalism, matriarchy
patriarch, patriarchal, patriarchic, patriarchalism, patriarchy ma, maternal
maudlin foolishly emotional 
When Maude drinks too much, she becomes maudlin, crying over silly things like her shoelaces coming untied. 
maudlinism, maudlinly, maudlinness unmaudlin, unmaudlinly 
maverick a person who chooses to be independent in behavior or thought 
Even though the other ranchers were branding their cattle, Sam was a maverick who believed he did not need to follow the rules set by his associates.
melange a mixture 
Melanie’s walls are decorated with a mélange of surfing posters and beach photographs.
mendacious lying, false, or untrue 
The mendacious girl said that she didn’t take her mother’s lipstick, but the bright red evidence was all over her face.   mendaciously, mendaciousness, mendacity
mendicant begging 
In the poverty-stricken country, mendicant children approach tourists to ask for food and money.
mendicancy, mendicity
mercurial apt to change; volatile; lively 
Meryl was known for her mercurial moods; she could be charming and kind one minute and caustic and hateful the next.
mercurially, mercurialness unmercurial, unmercurially, unmercurialness mercury
meretricious insincere; flashily attractive 
Meredith bestowed meretricious praise upon Mark on-camera, but she had nothing nice to say about him off-camera.
meretriciously, meretriciousness unmeretricious, unmeretriciously, unmeretriciousness 
meritocracy a form of social system in which power goes to those with superior abilities 
Critics argue that a meritocracy cannot be fairly created, as intelligence and ability are difficult to measure accurately.
meritocratic merit
meticulous extremely careful and precise with details 
Miss Walter demanded meticulous essays; perfect spelling and punctuation were essential for a high grade. meticulously, meticulousness, meticulosity militate to have substantial influence 
Millie's grandfather's significant donations to the university militated for her acceptance in the admissions process. militation military, militia
mirth laughter or merriment 
Even the old scrooge could not resist the mirth of the holiday season, as he eventually joined in the celebration.
mirthful, mirthfully, mirthfulness, mirthless, mirthlessly, mirthlessness 
misanthrope a person who hates and distrusts mankind 
The main character is a bitter misanthrope who learns to trust again through her friendship with the children next door.
misanthropist, misanthropic, misanthropical, misanthropically, misanthropy
miscreant a person who is evil or villainous 
The miscreant came to town with the intention of creating strife and commotion, as he enjoyed watching others argue.
miscreant (adj.), miscreance, miscreancy
miser a stingy person who lives in miserable conditions in order to save money 
The old miser lives in a rat-infested apartment even though he has more than enough money to live in a nice home.   miserly, miserliness misery, miserable
missive a letter 
The governor sent out missives to her supportive constituents, thanking them for their contributions to her campaign.
mitigate to make less intense or severe 
Mitch was grounded for a week when he broke curfew, but his mom mitigated his punishment by several days when she learned that he had been late because he was taking a sick friend to the hospital.
mitigable, mitigatedly, mitigation, mitigative, mitigatory, mitigator
immitigable, immitigably, immitigability, unmitigable, unmitigated, unmitigatedly 
mollify to soften or soothe 
Molly was able to mollify the crying child by offering him an ice cream cone.
mollification, mollifier, mollifyingly, mollifiable 
molt to shed feathers 
The cockatoo molted every spring in preparation for new feathers.
molter 
monastic relating to monasteries or relating to a dedicated way of life 
Mona lived a monastic life, refraining from sensual pleasures and the accumulation of material possessions. 
monastically nonmonastic , nonmonastically 
pseudomonastic, monastery
morass 1. a swamp 2. a difficult situation 
After Morgan accepted Jill’s invitation to the dance, he found himself in a morass; his friend offered him a ticket to a concert that he really wanted to see, but it happened to be on the same night as the dance.
moratorium suspension of an ongoing activity 
When many students were late returning from lunch, the principal placed a moratorium on off-campus lunch privileges.
moratory
mores important customs or beliefs of a group 
The advertisements in the housekeeping magazine from 1950 reflect the social mores of the time.
morose gloomy 
After his girlfriend moved away, Morris became morose and depressed.   morosely, moroseness, morosity 
multifarious having many parts and much variety 
The school offers multifarious activities after school; children should have no problem finding a program that matches their interests.
multifariously, multifariousness 
mundane ordinary and somewhat boring 
While a trip to the beach had once been exciting, we went so often that it had become mundane.
mundanely, mundaneness, mundanity
munificent very generous 
The munificent donor gave the hospital enough money to build a specialized center for heart patients.
munificently, munificentness, munificence 
myopic lacking long-term vision 
Maya has a myopic outlook when it comes to investment; she complains about the money she is investing now, rather than focusing on the money she will make in the future.   myopically, myopia
nadir the lowest point 
Nadia entered the nadir of despair when she lost her job and her fiance called off the wedding.   nadiral 
naïve inexperienced and gullible 
Nan was naïve in thinking that no one looked at her online social page except her friends; her father looked at it daily.
naïvely, naïveness, naïveté
narcissist a person who has excessive love or admiration of oneself 
Nancy is a narcissist who is unable to love her husband or her children as much as she loves herself.
narcist, narcissism, narcistic, narcissistic, narcissistically
nascent being born or beginning 
The nascent hockey team did not have much experience, as this was their first year in the league.   nascence, nascency
nebulous vague or cloudy 
When I woke up in the hospital, I only had a nebulous memory of the accident.
nebulously, nebulousness nonnebulous, nonnebulously, nonnebulousness 
nefarious extremely wicked 
In the novel, the nefarious character plotted to financially destroy the hero.
nefariously, nefariousness
neologism a new word 
Each year Merriam Webster decides which neologisms will be granted entry into their dictionaries.
neologist, neologistic, neologistical, neology
neophyte a beginner 
Neil is a neophyte at downhill skiing, so he should stick to the smaller hills today.
neophytic, neophytish, neophytism
nettle to irritate 
I was nettled by her annoying voice.
nettle (n), nettler, nettly unnettled 
nihilism belief in the rejection of rules and the destruction of social and political order  During the rebellion, the followers of nihilism were the first to break the laws in the city.
nihilistic, nihilistically, nihility, nihilist
noisome offensive (especially odors) 
My noisome shoe smelled so terrible that my mom threw it away.
noisomely, noisomeness
nominal in name only; minimal 
The president was a nominal leader; the real people making the important decisions were his advisors.   prenominal unnominal, unnominally 
noxious harmful 
The danger of a carbon dioxide leak is that the noxious fumes are odorless. noxiously, noxiousness nuance a subtle difference 
The nuances between the two fonts are often missed by the untrained graphic designer.
nuanced
numismatic pertaining to coins or medals 
The archeologist found numismatic evidence of the ancient civilization, including three coins with depictions of animals.
numismatics, numismatical, numismatically 
obdurate stubborn 
The obdurate child refused to eat his vegetables and sat at the dinner table with the untouched broccoli until bedtime.
obdurately, obdurateness, obduracy indurate
obfuscate to confuse or make unclear 
If a solution to a math question requires units to be in inches, the test makers may obfuscate the question by using feet.
obfuscation, obfuscatory
oblique slanting; not straight; indirect or evasive 
The politician made oblique comments about his opponent, hinting at corruption but not actually saying it was an issue.
obliquely, obliqueness 
obstreperous noisily defiant or aggressive 
The obstreperous students crowded the school board meeting to protest the new dress code.
obstreperously, obstreperousness, obstreperosity 
obscure not clearly understood or expressed 
Most of the movie audience did not understand the obscure reference to the other movie.
obscure (vb.), obscurely, obscureness, obscuredly, obscurity 
obsequious overly flattering or obedient 
The new employee was distrusted by his co-workers because of his obsequious behavior; he agreed with everything the boss said and laughed at all of her bad jokes.
obsequiously, obsequiousness, obsequence
obstinate extremely stubborn 
Mr. O’Brien was obstinate about eating at the bistro; he refused to eat anywhere else.
obstinately, obstinateness, obstinacy 
obstreperous noisily defiant or aggressive 
The obstreperous students crowded the school board meeting to protest the new dress code.
obstreperously, obstreperousness, obstreperosity 
obstructionist a person who purposely blocks progress 
Alberta worried that obstructionists would interfere with her environmental bill, ending her efforts to save the eagles.
obstructionistic, obstructionism obstruct, obstruction, obstructive
obtuse intellectually slow; dull 
You might have to simplify your explanation of photosynthesis because Obie is a bit obtuse.
obtusely, obtuseness
obviate to prevent any perceived difficulty 
The car seat manufacturer obviated the risk of injury by removing the cup holder from the most recent model.   obviable, obviation, obviator, preobviate unobviable 
occlude to shut or block 
Plaque buildup in the arteries can occlude the flow of blood resulting in heart disease.
occludent, occlusion, occlusal include, nonocclusion 
 
odious offensive; hateful 
The majority of Americans view dog fighting as an odious crime. odiously, odiousness odium
officious aggressively forward 
My officious neighbor insisted on helping me after my accident, but I really just wanted to be left alone.   officiously, officiousness, overofficious 
ominous threatening or foreshadowing evil 
The dark clouds in the distance were ominous and threatened to ruin the picnic.
ominously, ominousness omen
onerous oppressive; burdensome 
Cinderella was saddled with onerous household duties while she lived with her wicked stepmother.
onerously, onerousness, onerosity nononerous, nononerously, nononerousness
opaque not clear; not allowing light to pass through 
The glass on the bathroom shower has an opaque layer that prevents people from seeing through it.
opaquely, opaqueness opacity
opine to express an opinion 
The editor opined about the evils of genetically modified foods in today's opinion section of the newspaper.
unopined opinion
opprobrium disgrace or severe criticism due to shameful behavior 
The team owner faced public opprobrium when he was caught making racial remarks. 
opprobrious, opprobriously, opprobriousness nonopprobrious 
opulent rich and luxurious 
The opulent kitchen had marble countertops and solid gold fixtures.
opulently, opulence, opulency 
oration a formal speech 
The political candidate delivered an oration about the benefits of her universal health care plan.   orate, oratorical, orator 
ornate highly decorated 
The ornate palace had colorful paintings and intricate wood carvings in every room.
ornately, ornateness ornament
orotund a rich voice or pompous speech 
The millionaire's orotund speech at the graduation ceremony was shocking; he was not normally known for being pompous and pretentious. 
orotundity rotund
orthodox customary; traditional 
Maria and Bryan chose an orthodox ceremony with the standard wedding vows and the typical progression of events.
orthodoxly, orthodoxness, orthodoxal, orthodoxical, orthodoxy   unorthodox, unorthodoxical, heterodox
ossify to harden like bone; to become inflexible in habits or beliefs 
Oscar was open-minded prior to college, but after graduation he began to ossify concerning politics.
ossifier unossifying 
ostensible pretended 
Austin’s ostensible excuse for missing school was that his grandmother was in the hospital; the real reason, however, was that he went to the beach.
ostensibly, ostensive ostentatious
overt open and observable; not secret or hidden 
The candidate’s overt support of stem cell research was unusual; he made it clear that if elected, he would work to increase research efforts.
overtly, overtness covert, covertly, covertness
overwrought extremely excited or disturbed  Eva became overwrought when she lost her cell phone.   overwork
pacify to calm; to bring peace 
The babysitter used a teething ring to pacify the crying baby. pacifiable, pacifyingly, pacific, pacifier, pacifist paean a song of praise 
The ancient Greeks sang paeans to Apollo and other gods.
paeanism 
palatial like a palace; magnificent 
Polly bought a palatial home that had eight bedrooms, two kitchens, a ballroom, and a six car garage.
palatially, palatialness unpalatial
palliate to relieve or lessen 
Aloe will palliate the pain from a sunburn.
palliation, palliator, palliative nonpalliation, unpalliated
pallid pale; lacking energy 
Palmer did not look healthy; his pallid skin had lost all trace of color.   pallidly, pallidness 
panacea a cure for all diseases, or a solution to all problems 
The manager believed the new software was a panacea for all of the company’s computer problems, but Pam was skeptical of its ability to improve the entire system.
panacean 
panache dashing style, flair, or manner 
Penny only dates men with panache; she prefers to be seen with flamboyant boyfriends.
panegyric a formal expression of praise 
The director delivered a panegyric about the center’s most helpful volunteer, praising her for helping the needy.
panegyrical, panegyrically, panegyrist, panegyrize, self-panegyric 
panoply complete or impressive array 
Penelope has managed to attract a panoply of bird species to her backyard bird feeder.   panoplied unpanoplied 
paradox a statement that contradicts itself but nevertheless may still be true 
Parker said, “I always lie,” but this is a paradox; if the statement is true, then he must be lying.
paradoxal, paradoxical, paradoxically, paradoxicalness, paradoxicality, paradoxology 
paragon a perfect example 
Parmida is a paragon of professionalism; she arrives on time, treats co-workers with respect, and refrains from gossip.
paragon (vb.), paragoned 
parenthetical characterized by the use of parenthesis 
A remark in parenthesis is called a parenthetical remark, which is usually used to explain the sentence.
parenthetic, parenthetically, parentheticalness parentheses
pariah a person who is rejected; an outcast 
Pamela became the pariah of the company when she was caught stealing money from her co-workers.   pariahdom, pariahism
parley to talk or confer 
The two generals met to parley their demands for surrender.
parley (n), parleyer 
parody a humorous imitation 
The awards show opened with a parody of a movie; all of the characters were played by monkeys dressed like the actors.
parody (vb.), parodiable, parodic, parodist 
parry to ward off, avoid, or evade 
The senator parried any questions about the scandal by focusing on the state of the economy.   parriable, parrier unparried, unparrying
parsimonious extremely reluctant to spend money; frugal and stingy 
The parsimonious woman told her grandchildren that the gumballs in the candy machine were too expensive.
parsimoniously, parsimoniousness, parsimony
partisan tending to favor one group or one way of thinking 
Gun control is a partisan issue; one party favors government management while the other prefers individual authority.
partisanship, partisanry, partisan (n.) nonpartisan, bipartisan 
party
pastiche a work that is a mixture of styles, materials, or sources 
Patsy's composition was truly a pastiche, borrowing musical elements from Bach, Beethoven, and Mozart.   pasticcio, pasticheur, pasticheuse
patriarch the male head of a family 
As the oldest of the seven, Uncle Pat was the patriarch of the family and thus gave the toasts at all family gatherings.
patriarchal, patriarchic, patriarchalism, patriarchy
matriarch, matriarchal, matriarchic, matriarchalism, matriarchy pa, paternal 
paucity an insufficient quantity or number  Pam realized there was a paucity of hamburger buns.
peccadillo a minor fault or sin 
Mr. Peck brought a bottle of white wine instead of a bottle of red wine to the dinner, but was forgiven for this peccadillo when he also produced a box of luxurious European chocolates.
pedagogical relating to education or teaching 
The course for new teachers taught the pedagogical principal that all children could learn.
pedagogy, pedagogic, pedagogically, pedagogism, pedagogery, pedagogish, pedagog, pedagogue 
pedantic overly focused on small details while teaching or learning 
It was difficult to be Penny’s partner because she was pedantic about recording every single step of the scientific method.
pedantical, pedantically, pedanticalness, pedanticism, pedantism, pedantry, pedant, pedantesque 
pejorative a word that is derogatory or belittling 
At one time, 'imbecile' meant weak, but it has since become a pejorative to describe a person who is intellectually slow.
pejorative (adj), pejoratively, pejoration
nonpejortaive, nonpejoratively, unpejorative, unpejoratively 
penchant a strong liking 
Penny has a penchant for poetry; she has filled two notebooks with poems and poetic lines. 
penitent feeling or expressing remorse for misdeeds 
The penitent criminal asked for forgiveness from the family he had robbed.
penitently, penitence impenitent, impenitently, impenitence   repentant, penance, penitentiary 
penurious extremely reluctant to spend money; stingy and frugal or extremely poor  The penurious old man refused to donate his spare change to the charity.
penuriously, penuriousness, penury
peregrinate to travel 
After high school, Perry chose to peregrinate through Europe before attending college.
peregrinator, peregrination peregrine, peregrinity
perfidious tending to betray 
The perfidious soldier was selling classified secrets to the army’s enemies.
perfidiously, perfidiousness, perfidy 
perfunctory done only as a matter of routine, with indifference and a lack of enthusiasm 
The principal gave a perfunctory speech about attendance, even though the students had heard the same speech a dozen times before.
perfunctorily, perfunctoriness
peripatetic traveling about 
Perry had a peripatetic nature, so after high school, he spent several years traveling Europe before attending college. peripatetic (n), peripatetically, peripateticism
permeate to spread throughout 
The smell of sweet apples permeated the room when Grandma pulled the apple pie from the oven. permeation, permeative, permeator, interpermeate nonpermeation pernicious exceedingly harmful 
The pernicious rumor could ruin several lives if permitted to spread.
perniciously, perniciousness
perquisite a payment or benefit in addition to one’s regular pay 
While working at the marina, my perquisites included free boat storage, a discount at the tackle shop, and daily tips.
perspicacity intelligence manifested by being astute 
My accountant’s perspicacity saved me thousands of dollars on my tax returns because he found hidden rebates.   perspicacious, perspicaciously, perspicaciousness perspicuity, perspicuous 
peruse to read 
After the lawyer perused the motion to suppress evidence, she declared it was a flimsy attempt that no judge would grant. 
perusable, peruser, preperuse, reperuse
pervasive spreading or spread throughout 
The pervasive odor of garlic quickly spread throughout the entire house.
pervasively, pervasiveness, pervade, pervadingly, pervadingness, pervasion, pervader   invade, invasive
petulant easily irritated over small issues 
The petulant actress stormed off the set when she discovered that her dressing room did not have bottled water.
petulantly, petulance, petulancy petty
phalanx a closely massed group 
The soldiers formed a phalanx to protect the building from the protestors. 
philanthropist a person who makes charitable donations intended to increase human well-being  As a young philanthropist, Phillip used to donate his allowance to the homeless shelter.
philanthropy, philanthropic, philanthropical, philanthropically
philistine a person who resists culture, the arts, or intellectual pursuits 
Phil is such a philistine; he'd rather sit at home and watch reality shows than go see a play or visit a museum.   philistine (adj), philistinism
phlegmatic unemotional; calm 
thought the kids would be excited about our trip to the amusement park, but their reaction was much more phlegmatic.
phlegmatical, phlegmatically, phlegmaticalness unphlegmatic, unphlegmatical 
picayune small and of little importance 
The man is a fool to let a picayune argument destroy his friendship with his neighbor.
picayunish, picayunishly, picayunishness 
pious religiously devoted 
The pious woman attended a church service seven days a week. 
piously, piousness impious
pith the essential part 
The pith of the argument was that Ren wanted Grayden's toy. 
pithy
pithy brief but meaningful 
The pastor made a pithy remark about integrity that made me reflect on my own habits long after the short sermon.   pithily, pithiness pith
placid calm 
When the wind died down, the lake became placid, with hardly a ripple disturbing the surface.
placidly, placidness, placidity
platitude remark repeated too often 
"The customer is always right" is just a platitude in which very few service-industry workers believe anymore.
platitudinous, platitudinarian, platitudinize plebeian of the common people; lacking sophistication 
The queen looked down upon her plebeian subjects who did not know anything about refinement or sophistication.   plebeianism, plebeianly, plebeianness unplebeian plebe
plethora overabundance 
At 300 applications, there are a plethora of qualified applicants for the program, but only 100 spots to fill.   plethoric, plethorically
pliant capable of being bent or capable of being influenced  The pliant plastic can be easily molded into any shape, size, or design.
pliantly, pliantness, pliancy pliable
plucky brave 
The plucky little duck jumped right into the water without waiting for its mother to lead the way.   pluckily, pluckiness
polemical controversial; causing opposition 
Polly published a polemical article about vaccinations that caused much debate among her readers.
polemic, polemically, polemicist, polemicize nonpolemic, nonpolemical, nonpolemically 
politic ingenious, wise, or diplomatic 
Paul made a politic manager; he kept employees happy and productive using tactful approaches and strategies.   politicly political
polyglot able to speak, read, or write in many languages 
The polyglot woman was an asset to the company; she could speak with customers in Japan, Germany, Spain, and 
Italy.
polyglot (n.), polyglotism monoglot
populist a person who supports the rights and powers of the common people  The candidate is a populist who believes in promoting the causes of the working classes.
populist (adj.), populistic, populism 
posit to assume as fact; to put in place 
The teacher posited that the children had cheated without hearing their side of the story.
posit (n) deposit
potentate a powerful ruler 
The potentate was born into the power of the monarchy; his family had ruled the country for over six hundred years.
potent
pragmatic practical; guided by practice rather than theory 
When her bobby pin broke, Penelope found a pragmatic solution; she used a paper clip to hold back her stray hair.   pragmatical, pragmatically, pragmaticalness, pragmatism, pragmatistic, pragmatist
prattle to babble 
The child prattled on about his love of robots.   prattler, prattingly
precipitate to bring about abruptly 
Prescott’s sudden decision to move to a smaller apartment was precipitated by the loss of his job.
precipitate (adj.), precipitately, precipitateness, precipitative, precipitator 
precipitous
precis a short summary 
Rather than submit the entire manuscript, I sent the publishing company a precis of my novel.   precis (vb) 
precocious advanced in development or maturity (especially in mental aptitude) 
The precocious little boy was able to solve the algebraic equation without any help from his teacher.
precociously, precociousness, precocity 
 
predilection a preference 
Preston has a predilection for cheddar so be sure not to serve mozzarella when he visits.
prescience knowledge of events before they happen 
Grandma had an eerie prescience about my accident before it happened but I was too foolish to listen to her warnings.
prescient, presciently
pretense a false act intending to deceive 
He got an interview with the pretense that he had a doctorate from Yale, but the interviewer quickly discovered the lie.
pretenseful, pretension, pretentious, pretentiously pretenseless, unpretentious   pretend 
prevaricate to lie or deceive 
Presley prevaricated about her grades, claiming to have a 3.5 GPA even though it was below 2.0. 
prevarication, prevaricative, prevaricatory unprevaricating 
pristine pure, clean, or unused 
The interior of the old car was in pristine condition; the upholstery was spotless and the equipment worked perfectly.
pristinely
probity honesty and integrity 
Prudence was often selected as hall monitor because of her probity; the teacher knew he could trust her.
proclivity a natural tendency 
Prescott had a proclivity to lie, so few people trusted him.
prodigal recklessly wasteful or lavishly abundant 
The prince was criticized when his prodigal spending was documented by the tabloid.   prodigal (n), prodigally
prodigy a person, often a child, who is extraordinarily gifted or talented 
The musical prodigy could play the most complicated Mozart composition on a piano by the time he was five years old.
prodigious
profligate shamelessly immoral or recklessly wasteful 
The profligate prince was criticized when his wasteful spending was documented by the tabloid.
profligate (n), profligately, profligateness
progenitor a direct ancestor or originator 
Although dogs now come in all shapes, sizes, and temperaments, the progenitor of their species was the wild wolf.   progenitorial, progenitorship genitor
proletarian of the working class 
Education is an important proletarian value; working class parents believe that a college degree will offer their children many more career choices.
proletarian (n.), proletarianly, proletarianness, proletarianism, proletary, proletariat
proliferate to grow rapidly 
The franchise has proliferated; there were just two restaurants ten years ago, but now there are more than two hundred.
proliferative, proliferation
propensity a natural tendency 
Mrs. Petty loved to talk to friends and neighbors, so it was no surprise that she had a propensity to gossip.
propitiate to calm or pacify 
The king was able to propitiate the mob by agreeing to meet with their leader.
propitiable, propitiatingly, propitiative, propitiator nonpropitiable
propriety accepted or appropriate standards 
When traveling abroad, it is important to observe the proprieties of your host country.
nonpropriety 
prosaic dull and lacking excitement 
Pam claimed the movie was predictable and prosaic, causing her to fall asleep halfway through.
prosaical, prosaically, prosaicness, prosaicism 
proselytize to convert someone to another belief, religion, party, or cause Prewitt spent the summer proselytizing for the governor’s re-election campaign.
provincial unsophisticated and limited; associated with the country 
The officer judged Prescott by his provincial dress; she assumed he was unsophisticated just because he wore overalls.
provincially, provincialism, provincialize, provincialist province
prudent careful and sensible 
Perry made a prudent decision when he chose not to ride home with his friend who had been drinking.
prudently, prudence, prudency, prudential
imprudent, imprudently, imprudence, imprudential prude
puerile childish; immature 
Your puerile jokes are suitable for the playground, but they won't get many laughs in a comedy club.
puerilely, puerilism nonpuerile, nonpuerilely 
pugilist a person who fights with his fists; a boxer 
The two pugilists entered the ring for the first round of the boxing match.
pugilistic, pugilistically, pugilism
pugnacious tending to quarrel or fight easily 
Paul cannot walk his pugnacious dog in the park because she always starts fights with the other dogs.   pugnaciously, pugnaciousness, pugnacity pugilistic 
pulchritude beauty 
The model's pulchritude earned her the coveted spot on the cover of the magazine. 
pulchritudinous
punctilious marked by precise accordance with details 
Mr. Putnam is punctilious about punctuation; all of his students must correctly use periods, commas, and semicolons.
punctiliously, punctiliousness, punctilio punctual
pundit a critic or expert 
The political pundits are employed by newspapers and television networks to evaluate the actions of the President.   punditic, punditically, punditry, punditocracy
pungent sharp; biting 
Cosette's pungent remark stung Kent; he could handle criticism about his job, but her bitter words were personal.
pungency, pungently nonpungency, nonpungent, nonpungently
pusillanimous timid; cowardly 
The pusillanimous lion asked the wizard for courage in the old fairy tale.
pusillanimously, pusillanimity 
putrefy to decay 
The forgotten vegetables putrefied in the hot sun. 
putrefiable, putrefier unputrefiable, unputrefied putrid
quaff to drink a beverage 
Quinn quaffed three sodas as if she had an unquenchable thirst. 
quaffer, quaffable unquaffed 
quell to put an end to 
The coach quelled the rumor that he was taking another job by signing an extension of his current contract.   quellable, queller
querulous complaining 
Quentin’s querulous tone irritated Nina; he always found something about which to complain.
querulously, querulousness
quiescent being quiet or still or inactive 
When the mine closed, the once-bustling town became quiescent and forlorn. quiescently, quiescence, quiescency quiet quixotic not sensible about practical matters; idealistic and unrealistic 
let Quincy make his quixotic plans for our summer vacation; he would soon realize that his itinerary was too expensive and unrealistic.
quixotical, quixotically, quixotism, quixote Don Quixote 
quotidian daily or commonplace 
The teacher completed a quotidian report that tracked her student's absences.
quotidianly, quotidianness 
raconteur a skilled storyteller 
Raquel was a true raconteur; by the time she finished telling the story about her vacation, everyone in the room was intently listening.
raconteuse recount
raiment clothes 
Raymond brought a change of raiment with him so that he could shower and dress after basketball practice.
array 
rancorous showing deep-seated resentment 
In the fairy tale, the rancorous stepmother is jealous of the young maiden’s beauty, youth, and innocence.
rancor, rancorously, rancorousness rancid
raucous unpleasantly loud and harsh  Rachel’s raucous laughter often drove people away.
raucously, raucousness, raucity
raze to tear down 
The old abandoned buildings were razed in preparation for the construction of the new baseball stadium.   razer
rebuke to sharply criticize or reprimand 
The principal rebuked the three students who wandered away from their chaperone on the field trip.
rebuke (n.), rebukingly, rebukable, rebuker
rebut to prove false using evidence 
The lawyer rebutted the witness’s testimony by providing contrary evidence.
rebuttable, rebuttal, rebutter but (conj.) 
recalcitrant stubbornly resistant to authority or control 
The recalcitrant protesters were not fazed by the presence of the campus security officer, and only a handful of them disbanded when the police arrived.
recalcitrant (n.), recalcitrance, recalcitrancy, recalcitrate, recalcitration
recondite difficult to understand without special knowledge 
The recondite blueprints were meant to be understood by architects, not by the layperson.
reconditely, reconditeness
redoubtable worthy of fear and respect 
Forrest is a redoubtable opponent on the tennis court; he has not lost a set in his last twenty games.
redoubtableness, redoubtably, redoubted 
redress to correct or to relieve 
The newspaper redressed the issue by offering an apology and printing the correct name of the suspect.
redress (n), redressable, redresser unredressable
refulgent radiant; shining 
The movie star's refulgent dress sparkled in the lights on the red carpet. 
refulgence, refulgency, refulgentness, refulgently unrefulgent, unrefulgently
 
refute to prove to be false; to deny as true 
The senator refuted claims he was arrested for careless driving by publishing his flawless driving record in the paper.
refutable, refutably, refutability, refutation, refutal, refuter
irrefutable, irrefutably, irrefutability
rejoinder a response 
Reggie's rejoinder did not sufficiently answer the question.
nonrejoinder
relegate to assign to a less important position; to demote 
Rae Ann was relegated to dishwashing when she was caught being rude to the restaurant customers she was serving.   relegable, relegation unrelagable, unrelegated
remiss careless and neglectful 
Rebekkah was criticized for being remiss in her work; she had made many careless mistakes this week.   remissly, remissness
remuneration payment 
Each of the workers received remuneration for helping Remy paint his house.
remunerate, remunerable, remunerability, remunerably, remunerative, remuneratively, remunerativeness,
remuneratory, remunerator
renounce to give up; to turn away from 
The king renounced the thrown when he married a woman who was not accepted by the royal family.   renounceable, renouncement, renouncer announce, denounce 
repast a meal 
We sat down to a repast of fried chicken, corn on the cob, and coleslaw.
repast (vb)
replete filled; complete 
My professor returned my essay replete with comments, suggestions, and criticisms.
repletely, repleteness, repletive, repletively unreplete
repose state of calmness; peace 
The artist likes to paint his subjects in repose as they lounge on the couch.
repose (vb), reposedly, reposedness, reposer
reprehensible deserving of punishment 
It’s a harsh punishment, but I do not feel sorry for you; stealing from a charity is a reprehensible crime.
reprehensibly, reprehensibility, reprehensibleness, reprehension reprehend
reproach to blame; to express criticism towards 
The board of directors reproached the company president for falling profits and decreased revenue.
reproach (n.), reproachingly, reproachable, reproachableness, reproachably
irreproachable,unreproachable, reproachless reproachful 
repudiate to reject 
The celebrity repudiated claims that she had undergone plastic surgery.
repudiable, repudiative, repudiation, repudiatory, repudiator
repugnant offensive 
The spoiled eggs that had sat in the hot car for several weeks offered the most repugnant smell I had ever experienced.
repugnantly, repugnance, repugnancy 
requite to repay or retaliate 
made a casserole for Rebecca last week and she requited the favor by returning my casserole dish filled with cookies.
requitable, requitement, requiter unrequitable, unrequited, unrequiting 
rescind to revoke or repeal 
The prospective buyers rescinded their offer on the house when they learned it had a termite infestation.   rescindable, rescinder, rescindment unrescinded
restive nervous; restless; impatient with authority 
The restive suspect was frustrated with the booking process; he was anxious to call his lawyer and post bond.
restively, restiveness
reticent inclined to keep quiet and private 
Ironically, the actor once known for his outspoken behavior became reticent in later years, refusing to grant interviews.
reticently, reticence, reticency
revere to regard with respect and awe 
Paul Revere was one of many colonists who revered freedom and democracy.
reverable, reverent, reverently, reverence, reverential, reverer
irreverent, irreverently, irreverence reverend 
reviler a person who uses abusive language 
Reva’s husband was a reviler who constantly criticized her appearance and behavior.
revile, revilement, revilingly vile 
rhapsodize to talk with great enthusiasm 
The saleswoman rhapsodized about the benefits of her company’s product.
rhapsody, rhapsodic, rhapsodical, rhapsodically, rhapsodist
rhetoric skill in using language to persuade; empty talk 
The real estate agent was well-versed in the rhetoric needed to sell the broken-down house.
rhetorical, rhetorically, rhetoricalness nonrhetorical, unrhetorical
ribald vulgar 
The comedian's ribald humor was offensive to many of the audience members who walked out of the club.
ribaldly 
rococo ornate style in language, music, etc. 
Her first novel was too rococo for the editor, who recommended that she delete some of the flowery language.
sacrosanct sacred; not to be criticized or violated 
Mr. Sackett considered his baseball cards sacrosanct; they were displayed proudly in his office behind thick plexiglass so no one would disturb them.
sacrosanctity, sacrosanctness 
sagacious acutely insightful and wise 
The sagacious teacher was quickly able to pinpoint Sarah’s learning disability, and thus tailor lessons to better help the child comprehend the material.
sagaciously, sagaciousness, sagacity sage
sage a person who is very wise 
Villagers who have seemingly unsolvable problems often seek the advice of the sage.
sage (adj.), sagely, sageness sagacious
salient easily observable; prominent 
Sally's most salient trait was her nose; it was large and slender, but somehow fit with her other delicate features.   saliently, salience unsalient, unsaliently 
salubrious healthy; wholesome 
This salubrious tea is said to help cure many ailments.
salubriously, salubriousness, salubrity nonsalubrious, nonsalubriously, nonsalubriousness 
sanctimonious being hypocritically religious or righteous 
The principal gave me a sanctimonious lecture about my tardiness, even though he was late to our last two meetings.
sanctimoniously, sanctimoniousness, sanctimony, sanctimonial sanctity, sanctify
sanguine confidently optimistic and cheerful 
Dr. Sanchez enjoyed working with Sandy, his most sanguine patient; she was always confident that her test results would be good, and if they weren’t, she was optimistic about her treatment.   sanguinely, sanguineness, sanguinity
sardonic characterized by bitter mocking Sara's sardonic reply was meant to ridicule the boy. 
sardonically, sardonicism unsardonic, unsardonically
satiate to fill to satisfaction 
After a day without anything to eat, the huge spaghetti dinner satiated my appetite.
satiated, satiation nonsatiation, unsatiated, unsatiating sate
schism division of a group into opposing factions 
The disagreement in the teacher’s lounge created two schisms in the school: teachers who approved of the rule change, and those who opposed it.
schismatic, schismatically, schismaticalness, schismatize, schismatist schismless 
scintillating brilliantly clever or flashy and exciting 
The animated movie has been praised for its scintillating dialogue, which is intended more for adults than children.
scintillatingly, scintillate, scintillant, scintillantly, scintillation
scoff to laugh at and show open disrespect 
Scott scoffed at the skate park rules; after the park closed, he hopped the fence and continued to skate until dark.   scoff (n.), scoffingly, scoffer
scrupulous abiding by morals or strict rules 
The scrupulous executive would not let the advertisement run with the misleading information printed in it.
scrupulously, scrupulousness, scrupulosity
unscrupulous, unscrupulously, unscrupulousness, unscrupulosity scruples 
sedition instigation of rebellion 
If the founding fathers had been caught, they would have faced charges of sedition for starting the American Revolution.
seditionary, seditionist, seditious, seditiously, seditiousness antisedition, nonseditious 
sedulous marked by care and persistent effort 
Siera was impressed by Wayne’s sedulous pursuit of a date; every day for the last three weeks, he had sent her a flower.
sedulously, sedulousness, sedulity 
sentient experiencing sense perception and consciousness 
In the film, the robot becomes sentient, experiencing human emotions and senses.
sentiently, sentience, sentiency insentient, insentience, insentiency
seraphic of an angel or celestial being 
The toddler looks so seraphic when he sleeps at night that it's easy to forget what a devil he is by day.
seraph, seraphim, seraphical, seraphically, seraphicalness nonseraphic
sibilant having a hissing sound 
The patient’s respiration was weak and sibilant, the result of smoking for so many years.
sibilantly, sibilance, sibilancy
sinecure a paid job with little work 
Cindy was fortunate to find a sinecure; she simply had to show up three days a week to collect a paycheck.   sinecureship, sinecurism, sinecurist 
slake to relieve thirst, hunger, desire, etc.; to make less intense  The ice cold soda slaked my thirst.
slakable, slakeless unslakable, unslaked
sobriquet a nickname 
The baby's full name was long and burdensome, so his parents used the sobriquet "Peanut."   sobriquetical 
solecism an error, especially in grammar 
The contraction "ain't" is a solecism that should be removed from your vocabulary.   solecist, solecistic, solecistical, solecistically 
solicitous anxious, eager, or worried 
The solicitous applicant was forced to wait three months before he received a response from the college.
solicitously, solicitousness solvent able to meet financial obligations Sully worked three jobs in order to remain solvent.   solventless, solvently
somnolent sleepy or drowsy 
The somnolent truck driver had been awake all night and was anxious to find a rest area so she could sleep.
somnolently, somnolence, somnolency, somnolescent
insomnolent, insomnolently, insomnolence, insomnolency insomnia
sonorous full and loud and deep, as a sound 
The sound from the sonorous bell echoed throughout the cathedral.
sonorously, sonorousness, sonority insonorous
sophistry a false argument meant to trick someone 
The mayor used sophistry to trick most of the town residents into believing that the property tax increase was necessary.
sophism, sophist, sophister
soporific tending to make sleepy or drowsy 
Sophie sang the soporific lullaby to help her young daughter fall asleep.
soporifically, soporiferous, soporiferously, soporiferousness soporose, soporous
Spartan strict; simple; serious 
Spencer's Spartan apartment at Michigan State University was clean and neat, free of clutter or any luxuries.
Spartanism, Spartanly, Spartanically non-Spartan 
specious 1. plausible but false 2. deceptively pleasing 
The merits of the diet are specious; while we want to believe we can eat unlimited protein, there are many health risks associated with the high-cholesterol plan.
speciously, speciousness, speciosity
sportive playful 
The sportive kitten chased the ball of yarn.
sportively, sportiveness, sportability unsportive, unsportively, unsportiveness sport
spurious false; not legitimate 
The applicant made spurious claims about attending a prestigious private school, but when the college learned the truth, they denied his application.
spuriously, spuriousness 
squalid filthy and repulsive 
The abandoned home was squalid; it was infested with rats and filled with trash.
squalidly, squalidness, squalidity
stasis state of inaction or lack of progress 
The company fluctuated between periods of growth and periods of stasis. 
stases static
stentorian very loud 
The best cheerleaders have stentorian voices.
stentorianly unstentorian
stevedore a laborer who loads and unloads vessels in a port 
Before the ship left port, the stevedores loaded it with nearly four tons of food and supplies for the long voyage.
stevedore (vb.)
stifle to stop or hold back 
stifled a yawn so Grandpa wouldn’t know that I was bored by his story.
stiflingly, stifler 
stigma a mark of disgrace 
Steve was able to find a job despite the stigma of having served time in prison.
stoic free from emotion; unmoved 
Mr. Stone's face remained stoic despite the pain and anger he was experiencing.
stoic (n), stoical, stoically, stoicalness unstoic
stolid unemotional; unmoved 
Mr. Stone's face remained stolid despite the pain and anger he was experiencing.
stolidity, stolidness, stolidly 
stricture a criticism 
The film critic made several strictures about the movie’s poor dialogue.   strictured
stultify to make one appear foolish, stupid, or useless 
The high school student stultified herself by insisting that Pittsburgh was in Tennessee.
stultifyingly, stultification, stultifier
stymie to stump or hinder 
The warden was stymied by the escape; the prisoners' cell doors were still locked, and there were no holes in the walls.
stymie (n.)
sublime of high value; supreme 
The sublime chef was well known for her amazing dishes.
sublimely, sublimeness, sublimer, sublimity unsublimed
subterfuge something intended to deceive 
Susan used the subterfuge of homework to avoid going to her grandmother’s house with the rest of her family.
fugitive 
subtle difficult to detect 
The subtle irony throughout the novel is missed by most readers.
subtly, subtleness, subtlety unsubtle, unsubtly
subversive supporting the overthrowing of a government 
The subversive group was arrested when one of the members told of the group’s plot to overthrow the king.
subversive (n.), subversively, subversiveness, subversivism, subvert, subversion
succinct expressed in few words; concise 
Your summary must be succinct, highlighting the main ideas but omitting the bulk of the text.
succinctly, succinctness unsuccinct, unsuccinctly
sully to make dirty or unpure 
Mrs. Sullivan’s reputation was sullied by accusations that she was embezzling money from the PTA.
sulliable unsullied
supercilious arrogantly disdainful 
Sue, who always wore designer clothes, glanced at my generic shoes with a supercilious sneer.
superciliously, superciliousness
superfluous having more than needed or wanted; excessive 
The lawyer’s continuing arguments were superfluous, as the jury had already reached a verdict.
superfluously, superfluousness, superfluity
supplant to replace or take the place of 
In the early 1990s, compact discs supplanted long-playing records.
supplantation, supplanter
surfeit surplus; extra 
There is a surfeit of gasoline this month so the price will be lowered significantly.
surfeiter unsurfeited, unsurfeiting
surly bad tempered or rude 
The surly customer was unhappy with every aspect of his meal.
surlily, surliness unsurlily, unsurliness, unsurly 
surreptitious stealthy and secret 
Before the colonists declared independence, they held a series of surreptitious meetings to secretly discuss their plan. surreptitiously, surreptitiousness sybarite a person devoted to luxury 
Sybil was a difficult dinner guest because she was a sybarite, insisting on the finest china, most luxurious decor, and the most expensive food.
sybarite (adj), sybaritism
symbiosis a mutually beneficial relationship 
Bees and flowers live in symbiosis; the bees pollinate the flowers while the flowers feed the bees.   symbiotic, symbiotical, symbiont 
sycophant a person who flatters others in order to gain personal favor; a brown-noser 
Sidney is a sycophant who compliments our English teacher in order to get a better grade on his assignments.
sycophantic, sycophantical, sycophantically, sycophantish, sycophantishly, sycophantism
syncopated to cut short; to accent beats that are not usually accented 
Because the readers longed for fluency and completion, the syncopated poem seemed unfinished.
syncopate, syncopation, syncopator unsyncopated
tacit unspoken and implied 
Although she never commented on our performance, the principal gave her tacit approval of our band by asking us to play at the next school function.
tacitly, tacitness taciturn
taciturn silent; not willing to talk 
The detective asked the lost girl her name, but the child remained taciturn, making it impossible to locate her parents.
taciturnly, taciturnity untaciturn, untaciturnly
tawdry gaudy and cheap 
The pretentious members of the club gawked at the guest's tawdry jewelry but she was impervious to their rude stares.
tawdrily, tawdriness untawdry
temerity fearless daring 
Tim jumped from the plane with temerity; he seemed so fearless and relaxed that it was difficult to tell that this was his first skydiving experience.
temerarious, temerariously, temerariousness
temperate moderate; not extreme 
The plants prefer a temperate climate—not too hot and not too cold.
temperately, temperateness, temperance, temper (vb.)
intemperate, intemperately, intemperateness 
tenacious unyielding; stubborn 
The tenacious defense refused to let the opponent score.
tenaciously, tenaciousness, tenacity
toady a person who flatters others in order to gain personal favor; a brown-noser 
The professional athlete has several toadies who play to his ego in order to enjoy the perks of being in his entourage.   toady (vb.), toadyish, toadyism
tome a long, heavy book 
The professor wants a short summary of your biography, not a tome he has to lug home with him.
torpid sluggish; lacking energy 
After the long weekend, Tony was torpid; even with multiple cups of coffee, he was sluggish all morning.   torpidity, torpidness, torpidly 
transient passing quickly or staying briefly 
The most transient years of your life are those spent in high school; someday when you realize how quickly your time there passed, you’ll wish you had spent more time enjoying your youth.
transient (n.), transiently, transientness, transience intransient transitory
treacly overly sweet or sentimental 
The movie is treacly, with several emotional scenes; it should be viewed with a box of tissues instead of a box of popcorn.
treacle
trenchant keen, cutting, or energetic 
Trent's trenchant wit was a bit too caustic for some of the audience, while others found him to be an effective speaker.
trenchancy, trenchantly 
trite repeated too often; overfamiliar through overuse 
Be sure to avoid trite expressions in your essay; instead of writing clichés like “I learned my lesson the hard way,” choose original sentences such as “It was a difficult lesson to learn.”
tritely, triteness 
truculence brutal cruelty and aggressiveness 
After the fight in school, Truman was expelled; the school board said that his truculence was a danger to the others.   truculent, truculently, truculency
truncated shortened by cutting off a part 
The author published a truncated version of the novel, because most people would not read a book with so many pages.
truncate, truncately, truncation trunk
turgid pompous or swollen 
Turner wrote a turgid speech that was sure to alienate at least half the audience with its pompousness.
turgidity, turgidness, turgidly unturgid, unturgidly 
turpitude vile, shameful behavior 
In the play, the character’s turpitude exceeds the villainous behavior exhibited by typical antagonists.
tyro a beginner 
As a tyro at snow skiing, Tyrone hired an instructor to give him a lesson before heading up the mountain.
tyronic 
ubiquitous existing everywhere at once; omnipresent  The fog was ubiquitous, blanketing the countryside.
ubiquitously, ubiquitousness nonubiquitary, nonubiquitous, nonubiquitously 
umbrage offense; displeasure 
The customer took umbrage at the clerk's rudeness and reported him to the corporate office.
unctuous unpleasantly and excessively suave 
The unctuous salesman winked at the ladies and flashed his college football ring at the men; ironically, his “charm” chased most customers away.
unctuously, unctuousness, unctuosity 
untenable impossible to defend 
Tina made an untenable argument that fell apart on cross examination.
untenably, untenability, untenableness tenable 
upbraid to criticize severely 
The sergeant upbraided the cadet for failing to put his gun together correctly.   upbraider unupbraided
usury the practice of lending money at an extremely high interest rate 
If you borrow money from a loan shark instead of from a bank, nothing can protect you from the resulting usury. 
usurious 
vacillate to waver or move back and forth 
Vanessa vacillated between the two universities; one minute she was attending the in-state school, and the next she was going to the college three states away.
vacillatingly, vacillation, vacillant, vacillator oscillate
 
vainglorious feeling excessive self-importance or pride for one’s own accomplishments 
The vainglorious actor brushed aside the reporter’s question about the charity in order to talk about the Oscar he won.
vaingloriously, vaingloriousness, vainglory vain: 
venerated highly respected 
The venerated teacher had earned the respect of his students by helping them meet the high expectations he set for them.
venerate, venerable, venerably, venerability, veneration, veneratively, venerator 
veracity honesty; truthfulness 
The mechanic was known for his veracity, so customers trusted his diagnoses of their car problems.
veracious nonveracity verify, verisimilitude
verbose using or containing too many words 
At the graduation ceremony, the valedictorian gave a verbose speech that caused many people to fall asleep.
verbosely, verboseness, verbosity verbal
verdant green with color or green with inexperience  The verdant garden was lush with plants.
verdancy, verdantly unverdant, unverdantly
verisimilitude the appearance of truth; the quality of seeming to be true  Even though the movie was based on a true story, the film lacked verisimilitude.
verisimilitudinous, verisimilar, verisimilarly veracity, similitude 
vestige a small trace 
The bricks from one corner of the foundation were the last vestiges of the historic hotel.
vestigial, vestigially, vestigium 
vicissitude a change or variation 
After a period of vicissitude in which Vin experienced much loss, he rebounded and regained control of the company.   vicissitudinous, vicissitudinary 
vim energy and enthusiasm; vitality 
Surprisingly, Victor attacked the science project with vim; he usually procrastinated and bemoaned such homework.
virtuoso a person who has mastered a certain skill or field 
Tonight I am attending a free concert in the park that features a young virtuoso on the violin.
virtuoso (adj.), virtuosic, virtuosity virtue, virtuous 
viscous sticky; thick 
The viscous nature of maple syrup makes it difficult to remove from dishes once it hardens.
viscously, viscousness, viscosity
vitiate to make imperfect; to corrupt 
The king was vitiated by power; soon after his coronation, he began to abuse his subjects and destroy the fair laws.
vitiable, vitiation, vitiator
vitriolic harsh or corrosive in tone 
The orchestra teacher’s vitriolic criticism stung Victoria; she had practiced all week only to be harshly critiqued in front of the entire class.
vitriolically, vitriol 
vituperate to use abusive language 
A children's welfare agency was contacted when the mother vituperated her son in the doctor's office.
vituperator unvituperated 
vociferous marked by loud outcry 
When the newspaper ran an article on the benefits of a dress code, there were vociferous complaints from the students.
vociferously, vociferousness, vociferate, vociferation, vociferant, vociferator voice
voluble talkative or fluent with words 
The voluble hairdresser talked the entire time he cut my hair.
volubility, volubly nonvolubility, nonvoluble, nonvolubleness 
wane to grow smaller 
Wayne’s interest in basketball began to wane after he played hockey; he even sold his basketball shoes to buy skates.   wax These two words are often used to describe the fullness of the moon.
wanton unrestrained; immoral; unjustified 
The pundit released wanton criticism on the book, even though it had been reviewed positively by other critics. 
wantonly, wantonness unwanton 
whimsical characterized by carefree impulses 
The babysitter’s whimsical personality meant that the kids were never bored; one minute they were making peanut butter cookies, and the next they were reenacting a scene from a famous play.
whimsically, whimsicality whim, whimsy
wily sly and cunning 
The wily real estate agent tried to get us to buy the house even though it was full of termites.
wile, wilily, wiliness unwily 
wistful expressing longing or yearning 
Willie gave the car one last wistful look before he left the dealership; he wished he had the money to buy it.   wistfully, wistfulness
wizened shriveled 
The old man's face was wizened with age. 
wizen
wraith a ghost 
Ray was upset after seeing a wraith which he believed forecasted his death.
wraithlike 
zealous enthusiastic and devoted 
The zealous sports fan had a tattoo of his favorite team’s logo on his ankle.
zealously, zealousness, zealot zeal
zenith the highest point 
The actress reached the zenith of her career when she won an Oscar for her role in the blockbuster.   zenithal 
zephyr a soft breeze 
The cool zephyr coming off the water was refreshing in the hot sun.
